The Amitabha Sutra 佛說阿彌陀經

Mouse over to see English and pinyin for a Chinese word. Click the word to see full details in Chinese and English.

姚秦龜茲三藏鳩摩羅什譯

Translated [from Sanskrit to Chinese circa 402 AD] at Yao Chin by the Tripitaka Master Venerable Kumarajiva from the Kingdom of Kuqa

如是我聞：

Thus I have heard:

一時，佛在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園，與大比丘僧千二百五十人俱，皆是大阿羅漢，眾所知識。長老舍利弗、摩訶目乾連、摩訶迦葉、摩訶迦栴延、摩訶拘絺羅、離婆多、周梨槃陀迦、難陀、阿難陀、羅睺羅、憍梵波提、賓頭盧頗羅墮、迦留陀夷、摩訶劫賓那、薄俱羅、阿[少/兔]樓馱，如是等諸大弟子，并諸菩薩摩訶薩——文殊師利法王子、阿逸多菩薩、乾陀訶提菩薩、常精進菩薩，與如是等諸大菩薩，及釋提桓因等無量諸天大眾俱。

Thus I heard, at one time Buddha dwelt in the Jetavana, Anathapimdasya Arama in the Kingdom of Sravasti together with a gathering of great Bhiksus, 1250 in all, all great Arhats whom the assembly knew and recognized. Elders Sari-putra, Mahamaudgalyayana, Mahakasyapa, Mahakatyayana, Mahakausthila, Revata, Suddhipanthaka, Nanda, Ananda, Rahula, Gavampati, Pindola-bharadvaja, Kalodayin, Mahakaphina, Vakkula, Aniruddha, and others such as these, all great disciples; together with all the Bodhisattvas, Mahasattvas, including Dharma Prince Manjusri, Ajita Bodhisattva, Gandhastin Bodhisattva, Nityodyukta Bodhisattva, and others such as these, all great Bodhisattvas. Also present were Sakra, chief among gods, and the numberless great multitudes from all the heavens.

爾時，佛告長老舍利弗：「從是西方過十萬億佛土，有世界名曰極樂。其土有佛，號阿彌陀，今現在說法。舍利弗！彼土何故名為極樂？其國眾生無有眾苦，但受諸樂，故名極樂。又舍利弗！極樂國土，七重欄楯、七重羅網、七重行樹，皆是四寶周匝圍繞，是故彼國名曰極樂。

At that time the Buddha told the Elder Sariputra, “Passing from here through hundreds of thousands of millions of Buddha lands to the West, there is a world called Ultimate Bliss. In this land a Buddha called Amitabha right now teaches the Dharma. Sariputra, why is this land called Ultimate Bliss? All living beings of this country do not endure sufferings but only enjoy bliss. Also, Sariputra, this Land of Ultimate Bliss is everywhere surrounded by seven tiers of railings, seven layers of netting, and seven rows of trees, all formed from the four treasures. For this reason it is named Ultimate Bliss.”

「又舍利弗！極樂國土有七寶池，八功德水充滿其中，池底純以金沙布地。四邊階道，金、銀、琉璃、頗梨合成。上有樓閣，亦以金、銀、琉璃、頗梨、車璩、赤珠、馬瑙而嚴飾之。池中蓮花，大如車輪，青色青光，黃色黃光，赤色赤光，白色白光，微妙香潔。舍利弗！極樂國土成就如是功德莊嚴。

“Moreover, Sariputra, the Land of Ultimate Bliss has pools of the seven jewels filled with the eight waters of merit and virtue. The bottom of each pool is pure, covered with golden sand. On the four sides are stairs of gold, silver, lapis lazuli, and crystal. Above are pavilions adorned with gold, silver, lapis lazuli, crystal, mother-of-pearl, red pearls, and carnelian. In the pools are lotuses as large as carriage wheels: green colored of green light; yellow colored of yellow light; red colored of red light; white colored of white light. They are subtle, wonderful, fragrant, and pure. Sariputra, the realization of the Land of Ultimate Bliss is meritoriously adorned like this.

「又舍利弗！彼佛國土，常作天樂，黃金為地，晝夜六時天雨曼陀羅華。其國眾生，常以清旦，各以衣裓盛眾妙華，供養他方十萬億佛；即以食時，還到本國，飯食經行。舍利弗！極樂國土成就如是功德莊嚴。

Also, Sariputra, in that Buddha land there is always heavenly music and the ground is yellow gold. In the six periods of the day and night a heavenly rain of mandarava flowers falls, and throughout the clear morning each living being of this Land, with sacks full of the myriads of wonderful flowers, makes offerings to the hundreds of thousands of millions of Buddhas of the other directions. At mealtime they return to their own country, and having eaten, they stroll around. Sariputra, the realization of the Land of Ultimate Bliss is thus meritoriously adorned.

「復次舍利弗！彼國常有種種奇妙雜色之鳥——白鵠、孔雀、鸚鵡、舍利、迦陵頻伽、共命之鳥。是諸眾鳥，晝夜六時出和雅音，其音演暢五根、五力、七菩提分、八聖道分如是等法。其土眾生聞是音已，皆悉念佛、念法、念僧。舍利弗！汝勿謂：『此鳥實是罪報所生。』所以者何？彼佛國土無三惡趣。舍利弗！其佛國土尚無三惡道之名，何況有實？是諸眾鳥皆是阿彌陀佛欲令法音宣流變化所作。舍利弗！彼佛國土，微風吹動，諸寶行樹及寶羅網出微妙音，譬如百千種樂同時俱作，聞是音者皆自然生念佛、念法、念僧之心。舍利弗！其佛國土成就如是功德莊嚴。

Moreover Sariputra, in this land there are many fantastic multi-colored birds: white cranes, peacocks, parrots, egrets, kalavinkas, and jivajivaka birds. In the six periods of the day and night the flocks of birds sing forth harmonious and elegant sounds. Their clear and joyful sounds proclaim their five roots, the five powers, the seven Bodhi elements, the eight sagely ways, and dharmas such as these. When living beings of this land hear these sounds, they are altogether mindful of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. Sariputra, do not say that these birds are born as retribution for their karmic offenses. For what reason? In this Buddha land there are no three evil ways of re-birth. Sariputra, in this Buddhaland not even the names of the three evil ways exist, how much the less their actuality! Desiring that the Dharma sound be widely proclaimed, Amitabha Buddha by transformation made this multitude of birds. Sariputra, in that Buddha land, when the breeze blows rows of jewelled trees and jewelled nets give forth subtle and wonderful sounds like a hundred thousand kinds of music played at the same time. All those who hear this sound naturally bring forth in their hearts mindfulness of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. Sariputra, the realization of the Land of Ultimate Bliss is thus meritoriously adorned.

「舍利弗！於汝意云何？彼佛何故號阿彌陀？舍利弗！彼佛光明無量，照十方國無所障礙，是故號為阿彌陀。又舍利弗！彼佛壽命及其人民，無量無邊阿僧祇劫，故名阿彌陀。舍利弗！阿彌陀佛成佛已來，於今十劫。又舍利弗！彼佛有無量無邊聲聞弟子，皆阿羅漢，非是算數之所能知；諸菩薩，亦復如是。舍利弗！彼佛國土，成就如是功德莊嚴。

Sariputra, what do you think? Why is this Buddha called Amitabha? Sariputra, the brilliance of that Buddha's light is measureless, illumining the lands of the ten directions everywhere without obstruction. This is why he is called Amitabha. Also, Sariputra, the life of that Buddha and that of his people extends for measureless limitless asankhyeya kalpas. This is why he is called Amitabha. Sariputra, since Amitabha realized Buddhahood, ten kalpas have passed. Also Sariputra, that Buddha has measureless limitless ‘sound-hearer’ disciples, all of who are Arhats. Their number is incalculable and so is his assembly of Bodhisattvas. Sariputra, the realization of the Land of Ultimate Bliss is thus meritoriously adorned.

「又舍利弗！極樂國土眾生生者，皆是阿鞞跋致。其中多有一生補處，其數甚多，非是算數所能知之，但可以無量無邊阿僧祇劫說。舍利弗！眾生聞者，應當發願，願生彼國。所以者何？得與如是諸上善人俱會一處。

Also Sariputra, all the living beings born in the Land of Ultimate Bliss are avaivartika. Among them are many who in this very life will achieve Buddhahood. Their number is many, in fact, it is incalculable and only in measureless, limitless asankhyeya kalpas could the number be spoken. Sariputra, those living beings who hear should vow, ‘I wish to be born in that country.’ Why is that? Those who thus attain are all superior and good people, all coming together in one place.

「舍利弗！不可以少善根福德因緣，得生彼國。舍利弗！若有善男子、善女人，聞說阿彌陀佛，執持名號，若一日、若二日、若三日、若四日、若五日、若六日、若七日，一心不亂。其人臨命終時，阿彌陀佛與諸聖眾現在其前。是人終時，心不顛倒，即得往生阿彌陀佛極樂國土。舍利弗！我見是利，故說此言。若有眾生聞是說者，應當發願生彼國土。

Sariputra, one must have good roots, blessings, virtues, and causal connections to attain birth in that Land. Sariputra, if there is a good man or good woman who hears spoken ‘Amitabha Buddha’ and holds the name, whether for one day, two days, three, four, five days, six days, as long as seven days, with one heart unconfused, then when this person approaches the end of life Amitabha Buddha and the entire assembly of holy beings will appear before him. If his mind is clear when the end comes when the end comes then he will attain rebirth in Amitabha Buddha's Land of Ultimate Bliss. Sariputra, I say this because because of this benefit. If living beings hear this spoken they should make the vow, ‘I will be born in that land.’

「舍利弗！如我今者，讚歎阿彌陀佛不可思議功德；東方亦有阿閦鞞佛、須彌相佛、大須彌佛、須彌光佛、妙音佛，如是等恒河沙數諸佛，各於其國出廣長舌相，遍覆三千大千世界，說誠實言：『汝等眾生，當信是稱讚不可思議功德一切諸佛所護念經。』

Sariputra, as I now praise the inconceivable benefit from the merit and virtue of Amitabha Buddha. Thus in the East are also Aksobhya Buddha, Merudhvaja Buddha, Mahameru Buddha, Meruprabhasa Buddha, Manjughosa Buddha, and other Buddhas as countless as the grains of sand in the Ganges River. In his own country each brings forth the appearance of a vast and long tongue, every-where overing the three thousand great thousand worlds, and speaks the sincere and true words, ‘All you living beings should believe, praise, and hold in reverence the inconceivable merit and virtue of this Sutra of the Mindful One of Whom All Buddhas Are Protective.’

「舍利弗！南方世界有日月燈佛、名聞光佛、大焰肩佛、須彌燈佛、無量精進佛，如是等恒河沙數諸佛，各於其國出廣長舌相，遍覆三千大千世界，說誠實言：『汝等眾生，當信是稱讚不可思議功德一切諸佛所護念經。』

Sariputra, in the worlds to the South are Candrasuryapradipa Buddha, Yashprabha Buddha, Maharciskamdha Buddha, Merupradipa Buddha, Arantavirya Buddha and other Buddhas as countless as the grains of sand in the Ganges River. In his own country each brings forth the appearance of a vast and long tongue, every-where overing the three thousand great thousand worlds, and speaks the sincere and true words, ‘All you living beings should believe, praise, and hold in reverence the inconceivable merit and virtue of this Sutra of the Mindful One of Whom All Buddhas Are Protective.’

「舍利弗！西方世界有無量壽佛、無量相佛、無量幢佛、大光佛、大明佛、寶相佛、淨光佛，如是等恒河沙數諸佛，各於其國出廣長舌相，遍覆三千大千世界，說誠實言：『汝等眾生，當信是稱讚不可思議功德一切諸佛所護念經。』

Sariputra, in the worlds to the West are Amitayus Buddha, Amitaskmdha Buddha, Amitadhvaja Buddha, Mahaprabha Buddha, Maharasmiprabha Buddha, Maharatnaketu Buddha, Suddharasmi Buddha and other Buddhas as countless as the grains of sand in the Ganges River. In his own country each brings forth the appearance of a vast and long tongue, every-where overing the three thousand great thousand worlds, and speaks the sincere and true words, ‘All you living beings should believe, praise, and hold in reverence the inconceivable merit and virtue of this Sutra of the Mindful One of Whom All Buddhas Are Protective.’

「舍利弗！北方世界有焰肩佛、最勝音佛、難沮佛、日生佛、網明佛，如是等恒河沙數諸佛，各於其國出廣長舌相，遍覆三千大千世界，說誠實言：『汝等眾生，當信是稱讚不可思議功德一切諸佛所護念經。』

Sariputra, in the worlds to the North are Maharcislamdha Buddha, Dumdubhisvaranirghosa Buddha, Duspradharsa Buddha, Adityasambhava Buddha, Jaleniprabha Buddha and other Buddhas as countless as the grains of sand in the Ganges River. In his own country each brings forth the appearance of a vast and long tongue, every-where overing the three thousand great thousand worlds, and speaks the sincere and true words, ‘All you living beings should believe, praise, and hold in reverence the inconceivable merit and virtue of this Sutra of the Mindful One of Whom All Buddhas Are Protective.’

「舍利弗！下方世界有師子佛、名聞佛、名光佛、達摩佛、法幢佛、持法佛，如是等恒河沙數諸佛，各於其國出廣長舌相，遍覆三千大千世界，說誠實言：『汝等眾生，當信是稱讚不可思議功德一切諸佛所護念經。』

Sariputra, in the worlds below are Simha Buddha, Yasas Buddha, Yasahprabha Buddha, Dharma Buddha, Dharmadhvaja Buddha, Dharmadhara Buddha, and other Buddhas as countless as the grains of sand in the Ganges River. In his own country each brings forth the appearance of a vast and long tongue, every-where overing the three thousand great thousand worlds, and speaks the sincere and true words, ‘All you living beings should believe, praise, and hold in reverence the inconceivable merit and virtue of this Sutra of the Mindful One of Whom All Buddhas Are Protective.’

「舍利弗！上方世界有梵音佛、宿王佛、香上佛、香光佛、大焰肩佛、雜色寶華嚴身佛、娑羅樹王佛、寶華德佛、見一切義佛、如須彌山佛，如是等恒河沙數諸佛，各於其國出廣長舌相，遍覆三千大千世界，說誠實言：『汝等眾生，當信是稱讚不可思議功德一切諸佛所護念經。』

Sariputra, in the world above are Brahmaghosa Buddha, Naksatraraja Buddha, Gamdhottama Buddha, Gamdhaprabhasa Buddha, Maharciskamdha Buddha, Ratnakusumasampuspitagatra Buddha, Salendraraja Buddha, Ratnorpalasri Buddha, Sarvarthadarsa Buddha, Sumerukalpa Buddha, In his own country each brings forth the appearance of a vast and long tongue, every-where overing the three thousand great thousand worlds, and speaks the sincere and true words, ‘All you living beings should believe, praise, and hold in reverence the inconceivable merit and virtue of this Sutra of the Mindful One of Whom All Buddhas Are Protective.’

「舍利弗！於汝意云何？何故名為“一切諸佛所護念經”？舍利弗！若有善男子、善女人，聞是經受持者，及聞諸佛名者；是諸善男子、善女人，皆為一切諸佛共所護念，皆得不退轉於阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。是故舍利弗！汝等皆當信受我語及諸佛所說。

Sariputra, what do you think? Why is it called Sutra of the Mindful One of Whom All Buddhas Are Protective? Sariputra, if a good man or a good woman hears this Sutra, practices it, and hears the names of all these Buddhas then this good man or woman will be a mindful person of whom all Buddhas protect and will irreversibly attain to anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Therefore, Sariputra, all of you should believe and accept my words and those which all Buddhas speak.

「舍利弗！若有人已發願、今發願、當發願，欲生阿彌陀佛國者；是諸人等，皆得不退轉於阿耨多羅三藐三菩提，於彼國土若已生、若今生、若當生。是故舍利弗！諸善男子、善女人若有信者，應當發願生彼國土。

Sariputra, if there are people who have already made the vow, who now make the vow, or who are about to make the vow, ‘I desire to be born in Amitabha's Country’, these people whether born in the past, now being born, or to be born in the future, all will irreversibly attain to anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Therefore, Sariputra, all good men and good women, if they are among those who have faith, should make the vow, ‘I will be born in that country.’

「舍利弗！如我今者，稱讚諸佛不可思議功德；彼諸佛等，亦稱說我不可思議功德，而作是言：『釋迦牟尼佛能為甚難希有之事，能於娑婆國土五濁惡世——劫濁、見濁、煩惱濁、眾生濁、命濁中，得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提，為諸眾生說是一切世間難信之法。』舍利弗！當知我於五濁惡世，行此難事；得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提，為一切世間說此難信之法，是為甚難！」

Sariputra, just as I am now one who praises the merit and virtue of all Buddhas all those Buddhas equally praise my inconceivable merit and virtue saying these words, ‘Sakyamuni Buddha can complete extremely rare and difficult deeds. In the Saha Land, in the evil time of the five turbidities, in the midst of the kalpa turbidity, the view turbidity, the affliction turbidity, the living beings turbidity, and the life turbidity he can attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi and for the sake of living beings, speak this Dharma which in the whole world is hard to believe.’ Sariputra, you should know that I, in the evil time of the five turbidities, practice these difficult deeds, attain anuttara-samak-sambodhi and for all the world speak this dharma, difficult to believe, extremely difficult!"

佛說此經已。舍利弗及諸比丘，一切世間天、人、阿修羅等，聞佛所說，歡喜信受，作禮而去。

After the Buddha spoke this Sutra, Sariputra and all the Bhiksus, all the gods, men, and asuras, and others from all the worlds, hearing what the Buddha had said, joyously welcomed, faithfully accepted, bowed and left.

Reference for Chinese translation: Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA), cbeta.org , Taisho Tripitaka, Vol. 12 No. 0366, <a href="http://tripitaka.cbeta.org/T12n0366_001">http://tripitaka.cbeta.org/T12n0366_001</a>. Reproduced in accordance with the Creative Commons license 姓名標示-非商業性-相同方式分享 3.0 台灣 (中華民國) 授權條款授權.

Reference for English translation: Ronald Epstein (Upasaka I Guorong) <a href="online.sfsu.edu/~rone/Buddhism/amitabha.htm">online.sfsu.edu/~rone/Buddhism/amitabha.htm</a>.
