佛教经常用的词汇、概念、佛经
Buddhism — Commonly used Vocabulary, Concepts, and Sutras

四圣谛 Four Noble Truths

四圣谛 or 苦集灭道 Four Noble Truths are

苦 suffering — suffering exists in life
集 desire — desire is the cause of suffering
灭 elimination — emancipation by eliminating desire
道 the way — the way 道 to emancipation is 八正道 the Noble Eightfold Path
八正道 Noble Eightfold Path

正见 Right Understanding
正思惟 Right Thought — includes avoiding 三毒 the three poisons of greed, hatred, and ignorance
正语 Right Speech
正业 Right Action
正命 Right Livelihood
正精进 Right Effort — thes are 四正勤 the Four Right Efforts
正念 Right Mindfulness — keep one’s mind focused on 四念住 the Four Foundations of Mindfulness
正定 Right Concentration — refers to 四静虑 the four stages of meditative concentration
三法印 Three Dharma Seals

无常 impermanence
无我 non-self
涅盘 Nirvana
三毒 Three Poisons

贪 greed
瞋 anger
痴 ignorance
四念住 Four Foundations of Mindfulness

身 body
受 feelings
心 mind
法 mental objects or dharmas
自皈依佛 Taking Refuge in the Buddha

南无本事释迦牟尼佛
Nánmó běn shì Shìjiāmóuní Fó
Let us take refuge with our teacher Sakyamuni Buddha. (Audio Play audio)

三皈依
Sān guīyī
To take refuge in the triple gem (Audio Play audio)

自皈依佛，当愿众生，体解大道，发无上心！
Zì guīyī Fó, dāng yuàn zhòngshēng, tǐjiě dàdào, fà wú shàng xīn！
Taking refuge in the Buddha, I wish all sentient beings understand the highest doctrine and make the greatest vow! (Audio Play audio)

自皈依法，当愿众生，深入经藏，智慧入海！
Zì guīyī fǎ, dāng yuàn zhòngshēng, shēnrù Jīngzàng, zhìhuì rù hǎi！
Taking refuge in the Dharma, I wish all sentient beings study deeply the Sutra Pitaka and acquire an ocean of wisdom! (Audio Play audio)

自皈依僧，当愿众生，统里大众，一切无碍！
Zì guīyī sēng, dāng yuàn zhòngshēng, tǒng lǐ dàzhòng, yīqiè wú ài！
Taking refuge in the Sangha, I wish all sentient beings lead the congregation in harmony and without obstructions! (Audio Play audio)

回向
Huíxiàng
Transfer of Merits (Audio Play audio)

慈悲喜舍遍法界
Cíbēi xǐ shě biàn fǎjiè
May kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity pervade all Dharma realms. (Audio Play audio)

惜福结缘利人天
Xīfú jié yuán lì réntiān
May all sentient beings benefit from our blessings and friendship. (Audio Play audio)

禅净戒行平等忍
Chán jìng jièháng píngděng rěn.
May our mindful practice of meditation and precepts help us realize equality. (Audio Play audio)

惭愧感恩大愿心
Cánkuì gǎn ēn dà yuàn xīn.
May we undertake the Great Vows with humility and gratitude. (Audio Play audio)

来源∶ 佛光山西来寺 
Source: Hsi Lai Temple, Foguang Shan

对联 Couplets

生耕致富
Earnest cultivation yields fruitful harvest
(This couplet from 2009 牛年 the Year of the Ox is a play on cultivation with a 耕 plough and 修行 Buddhist cultivation for a spiritually richer life)

五戒 Five Precepts

不殺生 No killing
不偷盜 No stealing
不邪淫 No sexual misconduct
不妄語 No false speech
不饮酒 No intoxication
佛教分类 Types of Buddhism

大乘 Mahayana
   	净土宗 Pure Land School
   	禅宗 Chan (Zen)
上座部 Theravada
金刚乘 Vajrayana (Tantric)
十大弟子 The Buddha's ten great disciples

大迦葉（摩诃迦叶） Mahakassapa — first in ascetic practice (苦行)
目犍连（目连）Maudgalyayana — first in magical powers (神通)
富楼那 Puma — first in teaching the Dharma
须菩提 Subhuti — first in understanding of emptiness
舍利弗 Sariputra — first in wisdom
罗喉喉 Rahula — the only son of the Buddha
阿难陀（阿难） Ananda — first in memory
优婆离 Upali — first in upholding the precepts
阿尼律陀（阿尼律）Aniruddha — first in observation
迦旃延 Katyayana — first in discussion
五阴 The five aggregates

五阴：色、受、想、行、识

The five aggregates are form, feelings, thought, actions, and consciousness.

食时五观 The five contemplations at mealtimes

(一)计功多少，量彼来处。(二)忖己德行，全缺应供。(三)防心离过，贪等为宗。(四)正事良药，为疗形枯。(五)为成道故，应受此食

(1) Contemplate the hard work and merit of the people that have brought the food to you and the different places that it comes from. (2) Comtemplate your own merit and whether it is worthy of receiving the food offered. (3) Protect your mind from excess, especially greed. (4) The proper purpose of food is for nutrition to prevent our bodies from becoming malnurished. (5) Accept this food to help you on your path to enlightenment.