The merits of maintaining this sūtra 持經功德分

Text 原文本

「須菩提！若有善男子、善女人， 初日分以恆河沙等身布施， 中日分復以恆河沙等身布施，後日分亦以恆河沙等身布施， 如是無量百千萬億劫以身布施；若復有人， 聞此經典，信心不逆，其福勝彼，何況書寫、受持、 讀誦、為人解說。

“Subhūti, suppose there were a good man [kulaputra] or a good woman [kuladuhitā] who, in the morning, gave his or her body away as many times as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River [gaṅgā]. In the middle of the day, this person would also give his or her body away as many times as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River [gaṅgā]. Then in the evening, this person would also give his or her body away as many times as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River [gaṅgā]. Suppose this giving continued for incalculable billions of eons [kalpas]. If there are people again who hear this sūtra with a mind of belief, without doubt, then the merits [puṇya] of these people surpass the former merits. How much more so for those who write, accept, maintain, study, recite, and explain it?

Sanskrit: yaśca khalu punaḥ subhūte strī vā puruṣo vā purvāhṇakālasamaye gaṅgānadīvālukāsamānātmabhāvān parityajet, evaṁ madhyāhnakālasamaye gaṅgānadīvālukāsamānātmabhāvān parityajet, sāyāhnakālasamaye gaṅgānadīvālukāsamānātmabhāvān parityajet, anena paryāyeṇa bahūni kalpakoṭiniyutaśatasahasrāṇyātmabhāvān parityajet, yaścemaṁ dharmaparyāyaṁ śrutvā na pratikṣipet, ayameva tatonidānaṁ bahutaraṁ puṇyaskandhaṁ prasunuyādaprameyamasaṁkhyeyam, kaḥ punarvādo yo likhitvā udgṛhṇīyāddhārayedvācayetparyavāpnuyāt, parebhyaśca vistareṇa saṁprakāśayet||

Comments

The Buddha is making an analogy to the Indian god Purusha, a cosmic being who sacrificed his self-existence for the creation of the world and the human race. (Red Pine 2009, p 253)

The English word eon translates the Chinese 劫, Sanskrit kalpa. A kalpa is a very long unit of time, equal to 4.32 billion years according to the Puranas.

Text 原文本

「須菩提！以要言之， 是經有不可思議、不可稱量、無邊功德。 如來為發大乘者說，為發最上乘者說。 若有人能受持讀誦，廣為人說，如來悉知是人，悉見是人， 皆得成就不可量、不可稱、無有邊、 不可思議功德，如是人等， 則為荷擔如來阿耨多羅三藐三菩提。何以故？須菩提！若樂小法者， 著我見、人見、眾生見、壽者見，則於此經， 不能聽受讀誦、為人解說。

“Subhūti, to summarize [khalu punaḥ], this sūtra has inconceivable [acintya], immeasurable, limitless merit [puṇya]. The Tathāgata speaks it to send forth those in the Great Vehicle [agrayāna], to send forth those in the Supreme Vehicle. If there are people able to accept, maintain, study, recite, and explain this sūtra to others, then the Tathāgata is always aware of them and always sees them. Thusly, these people are carrying the Anuttarā Samyaksaṃbodhi of the Tathāgata. Why? Subhūti, those who are happy with lesser teachings are attached to views of a self, views of a person, views of a being, and views of a life [jīva]. They cannot hear, accept, maintain, study, recite, and explain it to others.

Sanskrit: api tu khalu punaḥ subhūte acintyo'tulyo'yaṁ dharmaparyāyaḥ| ayaṁ ca subhūte dharmaparyāyastathāgatena bhāṣito'grayānasaṁprasthitānāṁ sattvānāmarthāya, śreṣṭhayānasaṁprasthitānāṁ sattvānāmarthāya| ye imaṁ dharmaparyāyamudgrahīṣyanti dhārayiṣyanti vācayiṣyanti paryavāpsyanti, parebhyaśca vistareṇa saṁprakāśayiṣyanti, jñātāste subhūte tathāgatena buddhajñānena, dṛṣṭāste subhūte tathāgatena buddhacakṣuṣā, buddhāste tathāgatena| sarve te subhūte sattvā aprameyeṇa puṇyaskandhenāṁ samanvāgatā bhaviṣyanti| acintyenātulyenāmāpyenāparimāṇena puṇyaskandhena samanvāgatā bhaviṣyanti| sarve te subhūte sattvāḥ samāṁśena bodhiṁ dhārayiṣyanti vacayiṣyanti paryavāpsyanti| tatkasya hetoḥ ? na hi śakyaṁ subhūte ayaṁ dharmaparyāyo hīnādhimuktiakaiḥ sattvaiḥ śrotum, nātmadṛṣṭikairna sattvadṛṣṭikairna jīvadṛṣṭikairna pudgaladṛṣṭikaiḥ| nābodhisattvapratijñai sattvaiḥ śakyamayaṁ dharmaparyāyaḥ śrotuṁ vā udgrahītuṁ vā dhārayituṁ vā vācayituṁ vā paryavāptuṁ vā| nedaṁ sthānaṁ vidyate||

Comments

Hui Neng says,

If people can hear this sūtra and realize its truth, both self and other suddenly vannish, and they at once become buddhas. Renouncing the body has limited merit and cannot compare with the unlimited wisdom of upholding this sūtra. (Red Pine 2009, p 257 quoting Hui Neng Exegesis on the Diamond Sūtra, Manji 0459)

The English word inconceivable translates the Chinese 不可思議, Sanskrit acintya. The English phrase in summary translates the Chinese 以要言之, Sanskrit khalu punaḥ. Some English translators use the phrase essentially speaking Elsewhere in this text moreover, is used. Kumārajīva does not often translate this phrase from the Sanskrit, which is generally more verbose than the Chinese. The English phrase Great Vehicle translates the Chinese 大乘, Sanskrit agrayāna.

Text 原文本

「須菩提！在在處處， 若有此經，一切世間天、人、阿修羅， 所應供養；當知此處，則為是塔，皆應恭敬， 作禮圍繞，以諸華香而散其處。

Subhūti, in every place where this sūtra exists, the devas, humans, and asuras from every world should provide offerings. This place is a shrine [caitya] to which everyone should respectfully make obeisance and circumambulate, adorning its resting place with flowers and incense.

Sanskrit: api tu khalu punaḥ subhūte yatra pṛthivīpradeśe idaṁ sūtraṁ prakaśayiṣyate, pūjanīyaḥ sa pṛthivīpradeśo bhaviṣyati sadevamānuṣāsurasya lokasya| vandanīyaḥ pradakṣiṇīyaśca sa pṛthivīpradeśo bhaviṣyati, caityabhūtaḥ sa pṛthivīpradeśo bhaviṣyati||15||

Comments

The English word shrine translates the Sanskrit caitya. The Chinese word used 塔 more literally means stupa. A stupa is a place where the relics of the Buddha or senior monks are kept, making this another analogy between the Dhárma, or the Buddha's teachings, and his body.
