Unborn knowing and perceiving 知見不生分

Text 原文本

「須菩提！若人言：『佛说我見、人見、眾生見、 壽者見。』須菩提！ 於意云何？是人解我所說義不？」　「世尊！是人不解如來所說義。 何以故？世尊說我見、人見、眾生見、壽者見，即非我見、 人見、眾生見、壽者見，是名我見、人見、眾生見、 壽者見。」

“Subhūti, suppose a person says, ‘The Buddha teaches [bhāṣita] views [dṛṣṭi] of a self [ātma], a person [pudgala], a being [sattva], and a life.’ Subhūti, what do you think? Does this person understand the meaning of my teachings?” “No, Bhagavān, this person does not understand the meaning of the Tathāgata’s teachings. Why? The views of a self, a person, a being, and a life, that the Bhagavān speaks of, are not views of a self, a person, a being, or a life, and are thus called the views of a self, a person, a being, and a life.”

Sanskrit: tatkasya hetoḥ ? yo hi kaścitsubhūte evaṁ vadet-ātmadṛṣṭistathāgatena bhāṣitā, sattvadṛṣṭirjīvadṛṣṭiḥ pudgaladṛṣṭistathāgatena bhāṣitā, api nu sa subhūte samyagvadamāno vadet ? subhūtirāha-no hīdaṁ bhagavan, no hīdaṁ sugata, na samyagvadamāno vadet| tatkasya hetoḥ ? yā sā bhagavan ātmadṛṣṭistathāgatena bhāṣitā, adṛṣṭiḥ sā tathāgatena bhāṣitā| tenocyate ātmadṛṣṭiriti||

Comments

In Section 6 the Buddha warned against attachment to notions (saṃjñā) of the four manifestations of self: a self (ātma), person (pudgala), beings (sattva), and a life (jīva). Here he warns against a view (dṛṣṭi) of each of these. The Sanskrit word dṛṣṭi includes not only the perception but also the interpretations of what we see. (Red Pine 2009, p 421)

In this passage the word teaches translates the Chinese 說, Sanskrit bhāṣita and vadamāna. The word view translates the Chinese 見, Sanskrit dṛṣṭi. The word self translates the Chinese 我, Sanskrit ātma. The word person translates the Chinese 人, Sanskrit pudgala. The word being translates the Chinese 眾生, Sanskrit sattva. Life (jīva) is not listed in the Sanskrit text
Text 原文本

「須菩提！ 發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心者，於一切法，應如是知，如是見，如是信解， 不生法相。須菩提！所言法相者， 如來說即非法相，是名法相。

“Subhūti, regarding all dharmas, one who is developing the mind of Anuttarā Samyaksaṃbodhi should thusly know [jñāta], thusly see, and thusly believe [adhimukta], not giving rise to notions [saṁjñā] of dharmas. Subhūti, the true characteristic of dharmas is not a characteristic of dharmas, and is thus called the characteristic of dharmas.

Sanskrit: bhagavānāha-evaṁ hi subhūte bodhisattvayānasaṁprasthitena sarvadharmā jñātavyā draṣṭavyā adhimoktavyāḥ| tathāca jñātavyā draṣṭavyā adhimoktavyāḥ, yathā na dharmasaṁjñāyāmapi pratyupatiṣṭhennādharmasaṁjñāyām| tatkasya hetoḥ ? dharmasaṁjñā dharmasaṁjñeti subhūte asaṁjñaiṣā tathāgatena bhāṣitā| tenocyate dharmasaṁjñeti||31||

Comments

The word know translates the Chinese 知, Sanskrit jñāta. The word believe translates the Chinese 信解, Sanskrit adhimukta. This can be understood as to believe with confidence. The phrase notions of dharmas translates the Sanskrit compound dharmasaṁjñā. More properly the diacritic should be below the m, as in dharmasaṃjñā.
