The adornment of pure lands 莊嚴淨土分

Text 原文本

佛告須菩提： 「於意云何？如來昔在然燈佛所，於法有所得不？」　「世尊！ 如來在然燈佛所，於法實無所得。」

The Buddha addressed Subhūti, saying, “What do you think? In the past when the Tathāgata was with Dīpaṃkara Buddha, was there any dharma obtained?” “No, Bhagavān. When the Tathāgata was with Dīpaṃkara Buddha there was truly no dharma obtained.”

Sanskrit: bhagavānāha-tatkiṁ manyase subhūte-asti sa kaściddharmo yastathāgatena dīpaṁkarasya tathāgatasyārhata-samyaksaṁbuddhasyāntikādudgṛhītaḥ ? subhūtirāha- no hīdaṁ bhagavan| nāsti sa kaściddharmo yastathāgatena dīpaṁkarasya tathāgatasyārhataḥ samyaksaṁbuddhasyāntikādudgṛhītaḥ||

Comments

Dīpaṃkara (Chinese: 然燈佛), literally lamp (Sanskrit: dipa, Chinese: 燈) bearer, was the previous Buddha. He bestowed a prediction on Śākyamuni that he would become a Buddha in the future. At that time Śākyamuni Buddha was a bodhisattva called Sumedha. The Cārya-nidāna includes a story of Dīpaṃkara meeting the Buddha in a past life as the Brahmin boy Sumedha.

Text 原文本

「須菩提！ 於意云何？菩薩莊嚴佛土不？」　「不也，世尊！ 何以故？莊嚴佛土者，則非莊嚴，是名莊嚴。」「是故須菩提， 諸菩薩摩訶薩應如是生清淨心， 不應住色生心，不應住聲、香、味、觸、法生心，應無所住而生其心。

“Subhūti, what do you think? Do bodhisattvas adorn buddha-lands [kṣetravyūhā]?” “No, Bhagavān. Why? The adornments of buddha-lands are not adornments, and are thus called adornments.” “Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva-mahāsattvas should thusly give rise to a clear and pure mind [citta] — a mind [citta] not associated with abiding in form; a mind [citta] not associated with abiding in sounds [śabda], scents [ganda], tastes [rasa], sensations [spraṣṭavya], or dharmas; a mind [citta] not abiding in life.

Sanskrit: bhagavānāha-yaḥ kaścitsubhūte bodhisattva evaṁ vadet-ahaṁ kṣetravyūhān niṣpādayiṣyāmīti, sa vitathaṁ vadet| tatkasya hetoḥ ? kṣetravyūhāḥ kṣetravyūhā iti subhūte avyūhāste tathāgatena bhāṣitāḥ| tenocyante kṣetravyūhā iti| tasmāttarhi subhūte bodhisattvena mahāsattvena evamapratiṣṭhitaṁ cittamutpādayitavyaṁ yanna kvacitpratiṣṭhitaṁ cittamutpādayitavyam| na rūpapratiṣṭhitaṁ cittamutpādayitavyaṁ na śabdagandharasaspraṣṭavyadharmapratiṣṭhitaṁ cittamutpādayitavyam|

Comments

Each of the four instances of the English word mind in this passage translates the Chinese 心, Sanskrit citta. 

The English word adorn translates the Chinese 莊嚴 and the word buddha-land translates the Chinese 佛土. This most likely means to adorn with flowers and jewels. A similar use of this word occurs many times in the Amitābha Sūtra where the Western Pure Land is ... "adorned with gold, silver, lapis lazuli, crystal, mother-of-pearl, red pearls, and carnelian." (T 12 No. 0366) The point in this passage is to avoid attachment to those adornments.

The Sanskrit text reads to transform worlds, kṣetravyūhā.

Text 原文本

　「須菩提！譬如有人， 身如須彌山王，於意云何？是身為大不？」須菩提言： 「甚大，世尊！何以故？佛說非身，是名大身。」

Subhūti, suppose a person had a body like Mount Sumeru, King of Mountains. Would this body be great?” Subhūti replied, “It would be extremely great, Bhagavān. Why? The Buddha teaches that no body is the Great Body.”

Sanskrit: tadyathāpi nāma subhūte puruṣo bhavedupetakāyo mahākāyo yattasyaivaṁ rūpa ātmabhāvaḥ syāt tadyathāpi nāma sumeruḥ parvatarājaḥ| tatkiṁ manyase subhūte api nu mahān sa ātmabhāvo bhavet ? subhūtirāha-mahān sa bhagavān, mahān sugata sa ātmabhāvo bhavet| tatkasya hetoḥ ? ātmabhāva ātmabhāva iti bhagavan na bhāvaḥ sa tathāgatena bhāṣitaḥ| tenocyata ātmabhāva iti| na hi bhagavan sa bhāvo nābhāvaḥ| tenocyate ātmabhāva iti||10||

Comments

This is a reference to the Vedic god Puruṣa, who sacrificed his body to create the universe.
