The principle of true perception 如理實見分

Text 原文本

「須菩提！于意云何？可以身相見如來不？」「不也，世尊！不可以身相得見如來。何以故？如來所說身相，即非身相。」　佛告須菩提：「凡所有相，皆是虛妄。若見諸相非相，則見如來。」

“Subhūti, what do you think? Can the Tathāgata be perceived by means of bodily marks [lakṣaṇa]?” “Certainly not, Bhagavān. The Tathāgata cannot be perceived by means of the bodily marks [lakṣaṇa]. Why? The bodily marks [lakṣaṇa] that the Tathāgata speaks of are not bodily marks [lakṣaṇa].” The Buddha told Subhūti, “Everything that has marks [lakṣaṇa] is deceptive and false. If all marks [lakṣaṇa] are not seen as marks [lakṣaṇa], then this is perceiving the Tathāgata.”

Sanskrit: tatkiṁ manyase subhūte lakṣaṇasaṁpadā tathāgato draṣṭavyaḥ ? subhūtirāha-no hīdaṁ bhagavan| na lakṣaṇasaṁpadā tathāgato draṣṭavyaḥ| tatkasya hetoḥ ? yā sā bhagavan lakṣaṇasaṁpattathāgatena bhāṣitā saivālakṣaṇasaṁpat| evamukte bhagavānāyuṣmantaṁ subhūtimetadavocat yāvatsubhūte lakṣaṇasaṁpat tāvanmṛṣā, yāvadalakṣaṇasaṁpat tāvanna mṛṣeti hi lakṣaṇālakṣaṇatastathāgato draṣṭavyaḥ||5||

Commentary

At a high level this means do not judge things by appearances.

The Buddha want us to transcend appearance. This is discussed further in Section 20. It is also mentioned in Section 13 and Section 26.

The word mark translates the Chinese 相, Sanskrit lakṣaṇa. In discussing bodily marks the text is referring to the thirty two marks of excellence of the Buddha (Sanskrit: dvātrijśan mahā-purusa-laksanāni, Chinese: 三十二相). In fact, the Sanskrit term mahā-purusa literally means "great man." Wheel-turning kings also have the thirty two marks of excellence. The bodily signs include feet with flat soles, wheels on the soles of the feet, and so on. These bodily signs are wonderfully symbollic and make for nice artwork but they are not reasons to revere the Buddha.

The Three Dharma Seals, also known as the Three Marks of Existence (Sanskrit: trilakṣaṇa, Chinese: 三法印) are (1) impermanence (Sanskrit: anitya, Chinese: 無常), (2) non-self (Sanskrit: anātman, Chinese: 無我), and (3) Nirvāṇa (Chinese: 涅盤) or that all phenomena (dharmas), except Nirvāṇa, are subject to suffering (Fo Guang Shan Online Dictionary). The lakṣaṇa part of the the Sanskrit word trilakṣaṇa is the same word as appears here in the text.

Coming back to the text, signs are deceptive and false because they are impermanent, do not have an independent self, and lead to suffering. So the problems with the bodily signs are (1) not only the Buddha has the thirty two marks of excellence, (2) these marks of excellence are not substantial in themselves because they arise from the Buddha's previous practice and the merit accumulated, and (3) the marks may lead to suffering.
