<a href="corpus_entry.php?uri=eight-realizations-anshigao.md">Text Information</a>

佛說八大人覺經

Sutra on the Eight Realizations of the Great Beings

後漢安息國三藏安世高譯

Translated by Venerable An Shi Gao in the Later Han Dynasty.

為佛弟子，常於晝夜，至心誦念，八大人覺：

A disciple of the Buddha should whole heartedly and often, whether day and night, recite and reflect on the eight realizations of bodhisattvas.

第一覺悟：世間無常，國土危脆；四大苦空，五陰無我；生滅變異，虛偽無主；心是惡源，形為罪藪。如是觀察，漸離生死。

One: Understand that the world is impermanent, nations are fragile and prone to collapse by nature. The four elements are empty, depending only on causes and conditions, and lead to suffering. Living beings are only a collection of the five aggregates of form, sense, thought, actions, and consciousness that they accumulate through time and have no independent self. Life is constantly changing and comes to an end. It is an illusion and impermanent. The mind is the source of all evil and the body is a marsh of sin. If we reflect on these things, we can gradually become free of Sansara, the abyss of suffering.

第二覺知：多欲為苦，生死疲勞，從貪欲起；少欲無為，身心自在。

Two: Understand that greater desire leads to suffering. Difficulty in life arises from greed and desire. People with few desires let events run their natural course are able to be at ease in body and mind.

第三覺知：心無厭足，唯得多求，增長罪惡；菩薩不爾，常念知足，安貧守道，唯慧是業。

Three: Know that that the mind is never satisfied and always pursues more. This leads to an ever increasing number of impure actions. Bodhisattvas are not like this. They are content with reciting the sutras and practicing in a simple way as they wisely choose as their only pursuits.

第四覺知：懈怠墜落；常行精進，破煩惱惡，摧伏四魔，出陰界獄。

Four: Realize that laziness will lead to degeneration. Always try to improve yourself and break through the vexation of bad vices, destroy the four kinds of evil, which hide, and break free from the the five skandhas and the eighteen dhatu.

第五覺悟：愚癡生死。菩薩常念，廣學多聞，增長智慧，成就辯才，教化一切，悉以大樂。

Five: Realize that ignorance leads to the cycle of life and death. Bodhisattvas often recite the sutras, study widely and ask many questions to increase their knowledge. With the wisdom and eloquence that they gain they are able to teach everybody to realize great joy.

第六覺知：貧苦多怨，橫結惡緣。菩薩布施，等念冤親，不念舊惡，不憎惡人。

Six: Realize that poverty creates resentment, which leads to a negative cycle of causes and conditions. When practicing giving, bodhisattvas treat everyone equally, friends and enemies alike, Bodhisattvas do not hold grudges or judge based on past mistakes, nor do they hate or treat any other beings as enemies.

第七覺悟：五欲過患。雖為俗人，不染世樂；念三衣，瓶鉢法器；志願出家，守道清白；梵行高遠，慈悲一切。

Seven: Be aware that the five desires lead to misfortune. Even though we are ordinary people, we should not pursue worldly desires. A monk has needs only three robes and one bowl. He wishes only to be a monk and to practice the Way. Holding his precepts keeps him free of worldly attachments and he has compassion for all.

第八覺知：生死熾然，苦惱無量。發大乘心，普濟一切；願代眾生，受無量苦；令諸眾生，畢竟大樂。

Eight: realize that the fire of Sansara are raging and causing immeasurable suffering. We should take the vow to help everyone cross to the other shore. Take the vow to help relieve the suffering of all living beings and lead them to great joy.

如此八事，乃是諸佛菩薩大人之所覺悟。精進行道，慈悲修慧，乘法身船，至涅槃岸；復還生死，度脫眾生。以前八事，開導一切，令諸眾生，覺生死苦，捨離五欲，修心聖道。

These eight realizations are the realizations of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. They have diligently practice the Way with compassion and wisdom to ferry the Dharmakaya boat to Nirvana, to be reborn in Sansara to help all living beings. These eight realizations can enlighten all living beings, to understand the suffering of life and death, to give up the five desires, and to practice the Noble Eightfold Path. If a Buddhist disciple recites these eight realizations then he or she will extinguish immeasurable sin. He or she will enter into enlightenment and quickly ascend to the correct understanding, forever breaking the cycle of suffering in life and death and attaining eternal joy.

<h3>References</h3>

Thich Nhat Hahn, Venerable 1987. The Sutra on the Eight Realizations of the Great Beings, Parallax Press, ISBN-10: 0938077074, ISBN-13: 978-0938077077.

Xing Yun, Venerable Master, 2001. A Commentary on The Eight Realizations of a Boddhisattva Sutra. Translated by Tom Graham, second edition, published by Buddha's Light Publishing (blpusa.com), Los Angeles 2001, 2010. ISBN 978-1-932293-44-9 (hardcover).

Reference for original Chinese text: Taisho Tripitaka, Vol. 17, No. 779, CBETA, http://tripitaka.cbeta.org/T17n0779_001/.

<h3>Notes</h3>

The English translation was adapted from the two translations in the References above.

The Chinese text was translated from Pali by An Shih Kao at the Lo Yang Center in China during the later Han Dynasty, 140-171 AD.
