<a href="corpus_entry.php?uri=hsingyun-three-Teachings.md">Text Information</a>

《人間佛教的戒定慧》序
Preface to the Threefold Training of Humanistic Buddhism

在佛教裡，一個初入道的沙彌，又名「勤息」，就是要「勤修戒定慧，息滅貪瞋癡」的意思。由此可見，人生最強大的敵人「貪瞋癡」煩惱，需要佛法的「戒定慧」三學才能降伏。
In Buddhism, for a novice Buddhist monastic beginning to enter the path “dilligent study” means to “dilligently cultivate the Threefold Training to extinguish desire, anger, and ignorance.” From this it can be seen that even the most powerful businessman needs the Threefold Training of the Buddha Dharma to be able to tame the afflictions of desire, anger, and ignorance.
 
戒定慧三學也就是經律論三藏，經藏詮釋定學，律藏詮釋戒學，論藏詮釋慧學。所以，修習戒定慧三學，在思想和生活上就能實踐佛陀的教法。
The Threefold Training of ethics, meditative concentration, and wisdom are discussed in the sūtras, Vinaya, and śāstras in the Tripiṭaka. The sūtras in the Tripiṭaka describes Teaching in meditative concentration. The Vinaya describes Teaching in ethics. The śāstras in the Tripiṭaka describe Teaching in wisdom. So, cultivation and study of the Threefold Training, in thought and activity, can fulfill the Buddha's teachings.

其實，不只是沙彌需要勤修戒定慧，就是在家信眾也要受三皈五戒，要研習經論；甚至大阿羅漢、大比丘、大菩薩，也莫不如是，都要勤修「戒定慧」。乃至佛教的宗派，雖然有漢傳、藏傳、南傳之分，但是每一個地區的佛教，也都是以戒定慧為本。可以說，佛教的僧信二眾，都要依三藏經律論、三學戒定慧為學習的主要內容。
In fact, it is not only monastics who need to cultivate the Threefold Training, the lay community also should take refuge, take the Five Precepts, and study the sūtras and śāstras. Even Arhats, great monastics, and great bodhisattvas also need to diligently cultivate the Threefold Training. All the Buddhist schools, whether Chinese, Tibetan, or Theravadan branches, and Buddhism teachings of all places, all take the Threefold Training as fundamental. It can be said that the two communities of Buddhist monastics and lay people both need to depend on the sūtras, Vinaya, and śāstras of the Tripiṭaka and the Threefold Training of  ethics, meditative concentration, and wisdom as their main study material.
 
「人間佛教」既然淵源於人間佛陀的開示，對於戒定慧三學，自然也定為人間佛教行者根本的勤修目標。乃至人間佛教的傳播，一方面固然要迎合時代的需要，但也要有傳統的佛法為根據，所以人間佛教發展至今，不得不把根本佛教的戒定慧提出來，作為人間佛教的思想依據。
Although the origin of “Humanistic Buddhism” started in the human world of the Buddha, regarding the Threefold Training of ethics, meditative concentration, and wisdom, it is natural that meditative concentration is a fundamental goal for practioners of Humanistic Buddhism to dilligently study. Even if the propagation of Humanistic Buddhism, on the one hand admittedly is to meet the needs of the time, it still needs to have traditional as a foundation. So, Humanistic Buddhism has developed to today but it cannot substitute the Threefold Training for something else. It forms the basis of Humanistic Buddhism thought.
 
例如，佛教的「三皈五戒」，人間佛教跟著就提出「三好、七誡」；佛教有「四禪八定」，人間佛教也定出各種生活禪定的修法；佛教注重義學之般若、中論、唯識、天台、華嚴等，人間佛教也不得不以傳統佛教的慧學，融和當代的文、史、哲、科技等學問，把佛教生活化於人間。
For example, from Refuge in the Triple Gem and the Five Precepts, Humanistic Buddhism formulates the Three Acts of Goodness and the Seven Precepts. In Buddhism there are the “Four Jhānas.” Humanistic Buddhism also defines number of meditation activities for cultivation methods.
 
　　星雲一生，弘法利眾，建寺安僧，現在到了年老告退之時，不得不為人間佛教做一些古今映照、傳統與現代融和的工作。所以此次在香港弘法三十餘年、紅磡香港體育館講座二十年紀念之時，特別以「人間佛教的戒定慧」為題，分三天講說。不敢說這是引古證今，只希望古今融和，也希望當代研究人間佛教的佛子們，以根本佛教的戒定慧為修學目標，並加以發揚戒定慧的時代精神，讓它成為人間佛教的依據。
 
 
　　所謂「一切人皆依一切法」，一切法都不離我佛如來的戒定慧三學。此次隨著「人間佛教戒定慧」三學的佛學講座之後，我將把三天的講演未定稿，加以重新整理，作為佛光人弘揚人間佛教的依據。這三天的講演，不敢稱談學論道，只能說是野人獻曝，只希望未來在「三法印」的印證下，人間佛教能點燃起戒定慧三學的火炬，以佛法來普照世間，為人間建立起一片清淨安樂的淨土。祈願以此微薄心願，供養一切眾生。
 
 
西元二○○六年十二月上旬 於佛光山傳燈樓
如需引用文章，請註明出處。 本網站由 佛光山資訊中心 協助製作Copyright © 著作權 佛光山 所有 All Rights Reserved.

Reproduced with permission of Fo Guang Shan