<a href="collection.php?colname=ksitigarbha">Text Collection</a>
<a href="corpus_entry.php?uri=ksitigarbha_taisho.md">Text Information</a>

地獄名號品第五

Chapter 5: The Names of the Hells

爾時，普賢菩薩摩訶薩白地藏菩薩言：「仁者！願為天龍四眾，及未來現在一切眾生，說娑婆世界及閻浮提罪苦眾生，所受報處地獄名號，及惡報等事，使未來世末法眾生，知是果報。」

At that time, the great Samantabhadra Bodhisattva said to Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva, “Compassionate One! I wish that, for the benefit of all the devas, dragons, and other dieties and the fourfold assembly, and also for all present and future sentient beings, explain in the suffering of the beings in the Sahā World and Jambudvīpa due to their own wrongdoing and the names of the hells and the karmic results [vipāka] in future lifetimes in the Period of Declining of Dhárma.”

地藏答言：「仁者！我今承佛威神，及大士之力，略說地獄名號，及罪報惡報之事。仁者，閻浮提東方有山，號曰鐵圍，其山黑邃，無日月光。有大地獄，號極無間。又有地獄，名大阿鼻。復有地獄，名曰四角。復有地獄，名曰飛刀。復有地獄，名曰火箭。復有地獄，名曰夾山。復有地獄，名曰通槍。復有地獄，名曰鐵車。復有地獄，名曰鐵牀。復有地獄，名曰鐵牛。復有地獄，名曰鐵衣。復有地獄，名曰千刃。復有地獄，名曰鐵驢。復有地獄，名曰洋銅。復有地獄，名曰抱柱。復有地獄，名曰流火。復有地獄，名曰耕舌。復有地獄，名為剉首。復有地獄，名曰燒腳。復有地獄，名曰啗眼。復有地獄，名曰鐵丸。復有地獄，名曰諍論。復有地獄，名曰鐵鈇。復有地獄，名曰多瞋。」

Kṣitigarbha replied, “Compassionate One! Now I use the divine power bestowed on me by the Buddha and the bodhisattva's power, I will briefly say the names of the hells and the retribution for wrongdoing in them. Compassionate One! To the east of Jambudvīpa is a mountain called Cakravada-parvata [Iron Wall Mountain]. This mountain is dark and mysterious. There is no light from the Sun or the Moon. There is a great hell called Avīci Hell. There is another hell called Great Avīci. There is a hell called Four Corners. Another hell is called Flying Knives. Another hell is called Fire Arrows. Another hell is called Pressing Mountains. Another hell is called Piercing Spears. Another hell is called Iron Cart. Another hell is called Iron Bed. Another hell is called Iron Bull. Another hell is called Iron Clothes. Another hell is called Thousand Knife Blades. Another hell is called Iron Donkey. Another hell is called Copper Ocean. Another hell is called Embracing Pillar. Another hell is called Flowing Fire. Another hell is called Plowing Tongue. Another hell is called Cutting Head. Another hell is called Roasting Feet. Another hell is called Eating Eyes. Another hell is called Iron Pill. Another hell is called Quarreling. Another hell is called Iron Ax. Another hell is called Much Hate.”

地藏白言：「仁者！鐵圍之內，有如是等地獄，其數無限。更有叫喚地獄、拔舌地獄、糞尿地獄、銅鎖地獄、火象地獄、火狗地獄、火馬地獄、火牛地獄、火山地獄、火石地獄、火牀地獄、火樑地獄、火鷹地獄、鋸牙地獄、剝皮地獄、飲血地獄、燒手地獄、燒腳地獄、倒刺地獄、火屋地獄、鐵屋地獄、火狼地獄。如是等地獄，其中各各復有諸小地獄，或一或二，或三或四，乃至百千。其中名號，各各不同。」

Kṣitigarbha said, “Compassionate One! Inside Cakravada-parvata there are hells like this. Their number is uncountable. Moreover, there is Raurava Hell, Pulling Tongues Hell, Excrement Hell, Copper Lock Hell, Fire Elephant Hell, Fire Dog Hell, Fire Horse Hell, Fire Bull Hell, Volcano Hell, Fire Rock Hell, Fire Bed Hell, Fire Beam Hell, Fire Eagle Hell, Cutting Tooth Hell, Peeling Skin Hell, Drinking Blood Hell, Burning Hand Hell, Burning Foot Hell, Inward Thorns Hell, Fire Room Hell, Iron Room Hell, and Iron Wolf Hell. Such are the many hells. Inside them are smaller hells, perhaps one, two, three, or four, even a hundred thousand. Of these each one has a a different name.”

地藏菩薩告普賢菩薩言：「仁者！此者皆是南閻浮提行惡眾生，業感如是。業力甚大，能敵須彌，能深巨海，能障聖道。是故眾生莫輕小惡，以為無罪，死後有報，纖毫受之。父子至親，岐路各別，縱然相逢，無肯代受。我今承佛威力，略說地獄罪報之事。唯願仁者，暫聽是言。」

Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva said to Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, “Compassionate One! These are the wrongdoings of the beings of Jambudvīpa. Such is the karma and the results of the karma. That karma is very great. It is equal to Mount Sumeru in size, as deep as a great ocean, and obstructs the holy path. Therefore, beings should not regard certain lesser evils lightly, believing that they are without guilt. After they die there will be retribution even for very slight wrongdoings. Father and son and other family will be separated and even if they happen to meet again neither would be willing to take the place of the other to endure their suffering. Today, by virtue of the Buddha's great power, I will briefly explain about retribution in these hells. I only hope that you, Compassionate One, will listen for a short time to my explanation.”

普賢答言：「吾以久知三惡道報，望仁者說，令後世末法一切惡行眾生，聞仁者說，使令歸佛。」

Samantabhadra replied, “I have known about retribution in the Three Lower Realms for a long time. However, I hope that you will explain for the benefit of all beings in later generations in the Period of Declining of Dhárma who may commit wrongdoing so that they will be led to take refuge in the Buddha.”

地藏白言：「仁者！地獄罪報，其事如是：或有地獄，取罪人舌，使牛耕之。或有地獄，取罪人心，夜叉食之。或有地獄，鑊湯盛沸，煮罪人身。或有地獄，赤燒銅柱，使罪人抱。或有地獄，使諸火燒，趁及罪人。或有地獄，一向寒冰。或有地獄，無限糞尿。或有地獄，純飛[金*疾]鑗。或有地獄，多攢火槍。或有地獄，唯撞胸背。或有地獄，但燒手足。或有地獄，盤繳鐵蛇。或有地獄，驅逐鐵狗。或有地獄，盡駕鐵騾。

Kṣitigarbha said, “Compassionate One! Retribution in some hells is thus: either a sinner's tongue will be pulled out and an ox will plow it. In some hells a sinner's heart will be removed and yaksas will feed on it. In some hells water will be boiled in a cauldron and the sinner cooked in it. In some hells sinners are forced to embrace a glowing red hot copper column. In some hells sinners are burned with fire chasing them. Some hells are freezing with ice everywhere. Some hells have an unlimited amount of excrement and urine. Some hells have flying axes. Some hells have many fire spears. In some hells sinners are struck on the back and chest. In some hells the hands and feet of sinners are burned. In some hells iron snakes capture and coil around the sinners. In some hells sinners are chased by iron dogs. In some hells sinners are ridden by iron mules. Compassionate one, such are the forms of retribution.

仁者，如是等報，各各獄中，有百千種業道之器，無非是銅，是鐵，是石，是火。此四種物，眾業行感。若廣說地獄罪報等事，一一獄中，更有百千種苦楚，何況多獄。我今承佛威神，及仁者問，略說如是。若廣解說，窮劫不盡。」

Each hell has its own kinds of instruments for punishment, whether they be made of copper, iron, stone, or fire. These four kinds of things are formed from the acts of karma. If I were to describe more kinds of retribution in the different hells, then I would need to explain each hundreds of thousands of kinds of suffering in each of the many hells. Today, by the great spiritual power of the Buddha, I have explained this in brief as you have asked. If I was to try to explain in full detail it would take many kalpas and I would not be able to complete the explanation.