<a href="collection.php?colname=ksitigarbha">Text Collection</a>
<a href="corpus_entry.php?uri=ksitigarbha_taisho.md">Text Information</a>

閻浮眾生業感品第四

Chapter 4: Karmic Retribution for Beings in Jambudvīpa

爾時，地藏菩薩摩訶薩白佛言：「世尊！我承佛如來威神力故，遍百千萬億世界，分是身形，救拔一切業報眾生。若非如來大慈力故，即不能作如是變化。我今又矇佛付囑，至阿逸多成佛已來，六道眾生，遣令度脫。唯然，世尊，願不有慮。」

At that time Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva spoke to the Buddha, “World Honored One! I used the mighty divine powers of the Tathāgata to be simultaneously in trillions of worlds to save sentient beings from their karma. If it were not for the great compassionat power of the Tathāgata I would not have been able to perform this transformation. The Buddha has entrusted me until Ajita becomes a Buddha to save sentient beings in the Six Realms. I will do this personally. I hope that the World Honored One will not worry about it.”

爾時，佛告地藏菩薩：「一切眾生，未解脫者，性識無定。惡習結業，善習結果，為善為惡，逐境而生。輪轉五道，暫無休息，動經塵劫，迷惑障難。如魚遊網，將是長流，脫入暫出，又復遭網。以是等輩，吾當憂念。汝既畢是往願，累劫重誓，廣度罪輩，吾復何慮？」

The Buddha told Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva, “All sentient beings that are not yet liberated have natures and consciousness that are not fixed. Bad habits have results and virtuous habits have results. Whether good or bad depends on the circumstances that they were produced in. They revolve on the Five Realms without a break. Going through kalpas as numerous as grains of dust they are confused by obstacles and difficulties. Like a fish swimming into a net in a long stream it escapes temporarily only to be caught again in another net. For that reason I worry about these people. However, since you have already made a vow and renewed it over the kalpas to save many sinners over many lifetimes, why should I worry?”

說是語時，會中有一菩薩摩訶薩，名定自在王，白佛言：「世尊！地藏菩薩累劫已來，各發何願？今矇世尊，殷勤讚歎。唯願世尊，略而說之。」

After these words were spoken one bodhisattva named Samādhi Self-Mastery King from amongst the congregation asked the Buddha, “What vow did Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva make so many kalpas ago that has led you to praise him so greatly today? I hope that the World Honored One can tell us briefly.”

爾時，世尊告定自在王菩薩：「諦聽！諦聽！善思念之，吾當為汝，分別解說。乃往過去，無量阿僧祇那由他不可說劫，爾時有佛，號一切智成就如來——應供、正遍知、明行足、善逝、世間解、無上士、調御丈夫、天人師、佛、世尊，其佛壽命六萬劫。

The Buddha said to Samādhi Self-Mastery King Bodhisattva, “Listen attentively! Listen attentively and think carefully about all that I going to explain to you. Long ago, an innumerable asamkhyeya nayuta unimaginable number kalpa in the past there was a Buddha called All-Knowledge-Accomplished Tathāgata. He had the epithets Worthy One, Knower of the world, Perfect in Knowledge and Conduct, Immaculately Departed One, Unsurpassed One, Tamer, Teacher of Devas and Human Beings, Buddha, and World Honored One. He had a live span of sixty thousand kalpas.

未出家時，為小國王，與一鄰國王為友，同行十善，饒益眾生。其鄰國內，所有人民，多造眾惡。二王議計，廣設方便。一王發願，早成佛道，當度是輩，令使無餘。一王發願，若不先度罪苦，令是安樂，得至菩提，我終未願成佛。」

“Before he left home he was the king of a small country. Together with the king of a neighboring country he practiced the ten virtues for the benefit of all sentient beings. The people in the neighboring country performed many unwholesome acts. The two kings discussed plans for many different skillful means. One king made a vow to first become a Buddha and then to save all the people, without exception. The other king made a vow that if he did not first save the beings from the suffering due to their guilt leading them to peace and happiness then he would not obtain enlightenment. Only after that would be become a Buddha.”

佛告定自在王菩薩：「一王發願早成佛者，即一切智成就如來是。一王發願永度罪苦眾生，未願成佛者，即地藏菩薩是。

The Buddha said to Samādhi Self-Mastery King Bodhisattva, “The king that made a vow to first become a Buddha is All-Knowledge-Accomplished Tathāgata. The king that made a vow to save sentient beings who had sinned from suffering for a long period is Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva.”

復於過去，無量阿僧祇劫，有佛出世，名清淨蓮華目如來，其佛壽命四十劫。像法之中，有一羅漢，福度眾生。因次教化，遇一女人，字曰光目，設食供養。

“Moreover, in the past, an immeasurable number of asankhyeya kalpas ago a Buddha called Pure Lotus Eyes Tathāgata was born. The Buddha had a life span of forty kalpas. In his Period of Semblance Dhárma there was an Arhat who virtuously saved sentient beings. When the Arhat was educating and cultivating people he met a woman called Bright Eyes who was making food offerings.

羅漢問之：『欲願何等？』

“The Arhat asked her, 'What do you wish for?'

光目答言：『我以母亡之日，資福救拔，未知我母生處何趣？』

“Bright Eyes replied, 'On the day that my mother died I used merit to save her but I do not know where she is now.'

羅漢愍之，為入定觀，見光目女母墮在惡趣，受極大苦。羅漢問光目言：『汝母在生，作何行業？今在惡趣，受極大苦。』

“The Arhat sympathized with her and entered meditation to find the answer. He saw that Bright Eye's mother had fallen an evil rebirth and was suffering terribly. The Arhat asked Bright Eye's, 'What did your mother do while she was alive? Presently, she is living in an evil rebirth and suffering terribly.'

光目答言：『我母所習，唯好食噉魚鱉之屬。所食魚鱉多食其子，或炒或煮，恣情食噉。計其命數，千萬復倍。尊者慈愍，如何哀救？』

“Bright Eyes replied, 'My mother's only customs were to eat fish and turtle. She especially indulged in eating fish and turtle eggs, either fried or boiled. Those account for tens of millions of lives. Honored sir, please sympathize. How can I save her?'

羅漢愍之，為作方便，勸光目言：『汝可志誠念清淨蓮華目如來，兼塑畫形像，存亡獲報。』

“The Arhat sympathized with her. As a skillful means he advised Bright Eyes saying, 'You can sincerely recite the name of Pure Lotus Eyes Tathāgata and sculpt and paint images of him for the benefit of the living and the dead.'

「光目聞已，即捨所愛，尋畫佛像，而供養之。復恭敬心，悲泣瞻禮。忽於夜後，夢見佛身，金色晃耀，如須彌山，放大光明，而告光目：『汝母不久，當生汝家，纔覺飢寒，即當言說。』

“After she heard this Bright Eyes gave up all that she loved, had images of the Buddha made, and gave offerings. Again with deferential respect she worshipped him and wept. Suddenly, later that night she had a dream about a Buddha with a golden body that shined like Mount Sumeru, large and bright. He said to Bright Eyes, 'Shortly your mother will be reborn in your household. When feeling hungry and cold he will speak.'

「其後家內，婢生一子，未滿三日，而乃言說，稽首悲泣，告於光目：『生死業緣，果報自受。吾是汝母，久處暗冥，自別汝來，累墮大地獄。矇汝福力，方得受生。為下賤人，又復短命，壽年十三，更落惡道。汝有何計，令吾脫免？』

“After that a servant girl in her household had a son. After not even three days the baby talked. He bowed and weeped with grief saying to Bright Eyes, 'We suffer karmic results [vipāka] ourselves for the karma that we create during our lives. I was your mother. I was in a dark place for a long time. Since I left you I repeatedly fell into a great hell. Now I have received strength from your virtue and am able to be reborn again. However, it is as a lowly person with a lifespan of only thirteen years and then to fall into an evil rebirth again. Do you have any idea for me that can lead me to escape this?'

光目聞說，知母無疑，哽咽悲啼，而白婢子：『既是我母，合知本罪，作何行業，墮於惡道？』

“Bright Eyes heard what was said and had no doubt that it was her mother. Choking with tears and weeping bitterly she said to the servant girl's son, 'Since you are my mother you should know your sins. What actions caused you to fall into an evil rebirth?'

婢子答言：『以殺害毀罵二業受報。若非矇福，救拔吾難，以是業故，未合解脫。』

“The servant girl's son said, 'I am suffering retribution due to the two karmas of killing and slandering. If it were not for your virtue saving me from this difficulty I would not be able to escape my karma.'

光目問言：『地獄罪報，其事云何？』

“Bright Eyes asked, 'What is retribution in Hell like?'

婢子答言：『罪苦之事，不忍稱說，百千歲中，卒白難竟。』

“The servant girl's son said, 'I cannot bear to describe it. Hundreds of thousands of years is not enough to describe to suffering.'

「光目聞已，啼淚號泣，而白空界：『願我之母，永脫地獄。畢十三歲，更無重罪，及歷惡道。十方諸佛，慈哀愍我，聽我為母所發廣大誓願：若得我母永離三塗，及斯下賤，乃至女人之身，永劫不受者，願我自今日後，對清淨蓮華目如來像前，卻後百千萬億劫中，應有世界，所有地獄，及三惡道，諸罪苦眾生，誓願救拔，令離地獄惡趣、畜生、餓鬼等。如是罪報等人，盡成佛竟，我然後方成正覺。』

“After hearing this Bright Eyes cried and wailed saying to the sky, 'I wish that my mother will always be free from hell and not commit any serious wrongdoing in her thirteen years of life and will not be born into an evil rebirth. Buddhas of the Ten Directions, have pity on me. Listen to the great vow that I take for my mother's sake. If my mother can forever be free of the three evil rebirths, rebirths in a low class, or in the form of a woman's body, in the eternity to come. I take this vow from today on in front of the image of Pure Lotus Eyes Tathāgata for trillions of kalpas to come I will save all sentient beings who suffer in all the worlds and the Three Lower Realms, including Hell. I will lead them away from Hell, from the Animal Realm, and from the Hungry Ghost Realm. Only after all the people suffering from retribution and they become Buddhas will I attain enlightenment.'

「發誓願已，具聞清淨蓮華目如來而告之曰：『光目！汝大慈愍，善能為母發如是大願。吾觀汝母，十三歲畢，捨此報已，生為梵志，壽年百歲。過是報後，當生無憂國土，壽命不可計劫。後成佛果，廣度人天，數如恆河沙。』」

“After she had made the vow she heard Pure Lotus Eyes Tathāgata say to her, 'Bright Eyes, you have great compassion. You are very virtuous making a vow like this on your mother's behalf. I see that your mother will have completed this retribution and then be reborn as a Brahmin with a one hundred year lifespan. After that retribution she will be reborn into the Land with No Sorrow and have a lifespan of uncountable kalpas. After that she will become a Buddha saving as many beings as there are grains of sand in the Ganges.'”

佛告定自在王： 「爾時羅漢福度光目者，即無盡意菩薩是。光目母者，即解脫菩薩是。光目女者，即地藏菩薩是。過去久遠劫中，如是慈愍發恆河沙願，廣度眾生。「未來世中，若有男子女人，不行善者，行惡者，乃至不信因果者，邪婬妄語者，兩舌惡口者，毀謗大乘者，如是諸業眾生，必墮惡趣。若遇善知識，勸令一彈指間歸依地藏菩薩，是諸眾生，即得解脫三惡道報。若能志心歸敬，及瞻禮讚歎，香華衣服，種種珍寶，或復飲食，如是奉事者，未來百千萬億劫中，常在諸天受勝妙樂。若天福盡，下生人間，猶百千劫，常為帝王，能憶宿命因果本末。定自在王，如是地藏菩薩，有如此不可思議大威神力，廣利眾生，汝等諸菩薩，當記是經，廣宣流布。」

The Buddha told Samādhi Self-Mastery King, “The Arhat that virtuously helped Bright Eyes then is now Aksayamati Bodhisattva. Bright Eyes' mother is now Salvation Bodhisattva. Bright Eyes is now Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva. Since the distant past he has been making compassionate vows like this as numerous as grains of sand in the Ganges to save large numbers of beings. If there are men or women in future generations that do not perform virtuous deeds but, rather, commit evil, including not believing in cause and effect, lewd acts, lying, being double-tounged, slandering Mahayana then those beings must fall into an evil rebirth. However, if they meet Dhárma friends who can be persuade to take refuge, in the snap of the fingers, in Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva. Many beings can be saved in this way from retribution in the Three Lower Realms. If they can wholeheartedly convert and esteem, revere, worship and praise and make offerings of incense, flowers, any kind of treasure or food and drink then they will enjoy wonderful bliss for trillions of kalpas. If their heavenly virtue is exhausted then thee will descend to be reborn in the human realm, also for hundreds of thousands of kalpas, often as an emperor and will be able to remember their previous lives and the causes and conditions that led them to their present lives. Samādhi Self-Mastery King, such is the unimaginable greatness of Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva, striving for the benefit of all sentient beings. You and other bodhisattvas should remember this sūtra and transmit it widely.”

我等千萬億菩薩摩訶薩，必能承佛威神，廣演是經於閻浮提，利益眾生。」

Samādhi Self-Mastery King said to the Buddha, “World Honored One! I hope that you will not be concerned. We, trillions of bodhisattvas and mahasattvas, by virtue of the Buddha's great strength, will widely teach this sūtra in Jambudvīpa for the benefit of sentient beings.”

定自在王菩薩白世尊已，合掌恭敬，作禮而退。

After Samādhi Self-Mastery King bodhisattva had spoken to the World Honored One he deferentially joined palms and respectfully withdrew.

爾時，四方天王，俱從座起，合掌恭敬，白佛言：「世尊！地藏菩薩於久遠劫來，發如是大願，云何至今，猶度未絕，更發廣大誓言？唯願世尊，為我等說。」

At that time, the Four Heavenly Kings all stood up and respectfully joined palms and asked Buddha, “Since anicent times many kalpas ago, Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva made this great vow. How is it that, until now, has not yet finished his work and still takes great vows? We wish that the World Honored One would explain.”

佛告四天王：「善哉！善哉！吾今為汝，及未來現在天人眾等，廣利益故，說地藏菩薩於娑婆世界，閻浮提內，生死道中，慈哀救拔，度脫一切罪苦眾生方便之事。」

The Buddha said to the Four Heavenly Kings, “Excellent! Excellent! I will tell you for the benefit of the present and future celestial beings and people about Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva's paths of birth and death in the Sahā World in Jambudvīpa, how he compassionately saves pitful people, rescues sentient beings who suffer from their own wrongdoing using skillful means.”

四天王言：「唯然，世尊！願樂欲聞。」

The Four Heavenly Kings said, “Yes, World Honored One! We desire to hear.”

慈愍此世罪苦眾生，復觀未來無量劫中，因蔓不斷，以是之故，又發重願。如是菩薩，於娑婆世界，閻浮提中，百千萬億方便，而為教化。「四天王！地藏菩薩若遇殺生者，說宿殃短命報。若遇竊盜者，說貧窮苦楚報。若遇邪婬者，說雀鴿鴛鴦報。若遇惡口者，說眷屬鬥諍報。若遇毀謗者，說無舌瘡口報。若遇瞋恚者，說醜陋癃殘報。若遇慳吝者，說所求違願報。若遇飲食無度者，說飢渴咽病報。若遇畋獵恣情者，說驚狂喪命報。若遇悖逆父母者，說天地災殺報。若遇燒山林木者，說狂迷取死報。若遇前後父母惡毒者，說返生鞭撻現受報。若遇網捕生雛者，說骨肉分離報。若遇毀謗三寶者，說盲聾瘖啞報。若遇輕法慢教者，說永處惡道報。若遇破用常住者，說億劫輪迴地獄報。若遇污梵誣僧者，說永在畜生報。若遇湯火斬斫傷生者，說輪迴遞償報。若遇破戒犯齋者，說禽獸飢餓報。若遇非理毀用者，說所求闕絕報。若遇吾我貢高者，說卑使下賤報。若遇兩舌鬥亂者，說無舌百舌報。若遇邪見者，說邊地受生報。

The Buddha said to the Four Heavenly Kings, “Since the ancient past, many kalpas ago, until today Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva has saved sentient beings but still he has not completey fulfilled his vow. He sympathized compassionately with sentient beings who suffer because of their own wrongdoing. Moreover, he cares about the beings to be born in the immeasurable kalpas of the future. So, for that reason, he keeps renewing the vow. Thus the bodhisattva in the Sahā World in Jambudvīpa uses trillions of skillful methods to educate and enlighten. Heavenly Kings! If Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva meets those who kill he will explain that their retribution will be doom to a short life themselves. To thieves he explains retribution by poverty. To people who commit lewd acts then he explains retribution by being reborn as a peacock, pigeon, or a mandarin duck. To those that use bad language then he explains retribution by their family fighting. To those that slander he explains retribution by having no tongue and ulcers. To those prone to anger he explains retribution by being ugly and old and feeble. To those who are stingy he explains retribution by unanswered prayers. To those who eat and drink in excess he explains retribution by hunger and thirst and throat disease. To those who overindulge in hunting he explains retribution by being scared to death or dying from mental derangement. To those who are disloyal to their parents he explains retribution by being killed by natural disasters. To those who burn mountain forests he explains retribution by dying of insane delusions. To cruel parents and step-parents he explains that being whipped in future lives will be the retribution. If he meetings people who catch young birds with a net then he explains retribution by having their flesh cut up. To those that slander the Triple Gem he explains retribution by being deaf, dumb, and blind. To those that slight the Dhárma and regard the teachings with arrogance he explains retribution by always being reborn in a lower realm. To those that abuse the property of the Sangha he explains retribution by spending hundreds of millions of kalpas in Hell. To those that defile religious practices and slander the Sangha he explains retribution by always being reborn in the Animal Realm. To those that burn, boil, slaughter, and harm living things he explains that they would be subject to the same acts as retribution. To those that break the precepts of abstaining from certain things and at certain times he explains retribution by rebirth as a starving wild animal or bird. To those that abuse and destroy things he explains retribution by having a lack of all that they seek. To those that are self-centered and arrogant he explains retribution in a lowly position. To those who are double-tongued and instigate trouble he explains retribution by having no tongue or one hundred tongues. To those with perverse views he explains retribution by being reborn in a remote area.

「如是等閻浮提眾生，身口意業，惡習結果，百千報應，今麤略說。如是等閻浮提眾生，業感差別，地藏菩薩百千方便，而教化之。是諸眾生，先受如是等報，後墮地獄，動經劫數，無有出期。是故汝等，護人護國，無令是諸眾業，迷惑眾生。」

“These are the bad habits and the results of the physical, verbal, and mental karma of the beings in Jambudvīpa. There are hundreds of thousands of kinds of retribution. Today, I only speak about them in general. And so Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva has hundreds of thousands of skillful means for teaching and transforming the beings of Jambudvīpa about the different kinds of karma and the results of karma. All sentient beings must first face retribution and then fall into Hell, experiencing uncountable kalpas without a time for release. So you all must protect people and protect nations not letting the many kinds of karma lead beings astray.”

四天王聞已，涕淚悲歎，合掌而退。

After hearing this the Four Heavenly Kings wept and lamented. They joined palms and retired.