This page shows the order and English and Chinese text for a typical Buddhist liturgy (課誦) at a Chinese temple for either a morning chanting (早課), evening chanting (晚課) session, or regular Dharma service (共修法會) .

<h3>南無本師释迦牟尼佛 Refuge in the Buddha</h3>
南無本師释迦牟尼佛（三稱）

I take refuge in the Buddha as my teacher (three times).

開經偈 Sutra Opening Verse

無上甚深微妙法

The supreme, deep and wonderful Dharma,

百千萬劫難遭遇

Is difficult to find in a billion kalpas.

我今見聞得受持

Let me accept and uphold everything that I see and hear today,

願解如來真實義

and hope to understand the Tathagata's true meaning.

<h3>誦經 Sutra Reading</h3>
[Recite one of the sutras.]
七佛滅罪真言 Sapta Jina Bhasitam Papa Vinas ana Dharani

離婆離婆帝。求訶求訶帝。陀羅尼帝。 尼訶啰帝。毗黎你帝。摩訶伽帝。真陵乾帝。莎婆訶。

lipalipate kuhakuhate taralite niharate wimalite swaha

<h3>三皈依 Refuge in the Triple Gem</h3>

自皈依佛，當願眾生，體解大道，髮無上心！
Taking refuge in the Buddha, I wish all sentient beings understand the highest doctrine and make the greatest vow!

自皈依法，當願眾生，深入經藏，智慧入海！

Taking refuge in the Dharma, I wish all sentient beings study deeply the sutras and acquire an ocean of wisdom!

自皈依僧，當願眾生，統裡大眾，一切無礙！

Taking refuge in the Sangha, I wish all sentient beings lead the congregation in harmony and without obstructions!

回向偈 Transfer of Merits

慈悲喜舍遍法界

May kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity pervade all Dharma realms.

惜福結緣利人天

May all sentient beings benefit from our blessings and friendship.

禪淨戒行平等忍

May our mindful practice of meditation and precepts help us realize equality.

慚愧感恩大愿心

May we undertake the Great Vows with humility and gratitude.

<h3>供養咒 Dhanya Dharani</h3>
供養清淨法身毘盧遮那佛，圓滿報身盧舍那佛，千百億化身釋迦牟尼佛，極樂世界阿彌陀佛，當來下生彌勒尊佛，十方三世一切諸佛，大智文殊師利菩薩，大行普賢菩薩，大悲觀世音菩薩，大願地藏王菩薩，諸尊菩薩摩訶薩，摩訶般若波羅蜜，

I make offerings to the tranquil Dharmakaya Vairocana Buddha; the perfect Sambhogakaya Locana Buddha; the trillion emanation body Sakyamuni Buddha; Amitabha Buddha of Western Pure Land; the future Buddha Maitreya; all the Buddhas of the Ten Directions; Manjusri, the bodhisattva of great wisdom; Samantabhadra, the bodhisattva of great practice, Avalokitesvara, the bodhisattva of great compassion; Ksitigarbha, the bodhisattva of the Great Vow; all bodhisattvas and great beings and great Prajnaparamita.

（早齋）粥有十利，饒益行人，果報無邊，究竟常樂。

(breakfast) Congee has ten good qualities, it helps one moving, it is the result of karma without limits, and it gives rise to great joy.

<h3>結齋偈 Closing Verse</h3>

薩多喃，三藐三菩陀，俱姪南，怛姪他，唵，摺隸主隸，準提薩婆訶。所謂布施者，必獲其利益，若為樂故施，後必得安樂。飯食已訖，當願眾生，所作皆辦，具足佛法。

Sà duō nán, sān miǎo sān pú tuó, jū zhí nán, dá zhí tā, ǎn, zhé lì zhǔ lì, Zhǔn Tí Sà pó hē. All those who give must do so for the benefit of others. Now that the meal is finished, I now hope that all sentient beings and that all will have sufficient Dharma.

<h3>Notes 注釋</h3>
The source of the Chinese text is source for Chinese text is the Fo Guang Shan Nan Tien Temple Liturgy (Chinese version). The source of the English translations for Refuge in the Triple Gem and Transfer of Merits is the Fo Guang Shan Hsi Lai Temple Liturgy (Chinese-English version). The Sanskrit for Sapta Jina Bhasitam Papa Vinas ana Dharani is from Imee Ooi, Ten Short Mantras Volume 4, which is short of some characters compared to the Chinese version above. There is no English for this mantra. The other translations are my own. Thanks to Venerable Jue Wei of Fo Guang Shan for her explanation.

<h3>References 參考文獻</h3>
1. Fo Guang Shan. Fo Guang Shan Nan Tien Temple Liturgy (in Chinese), published by Fo Guang Shan. 佛光山南天寺課誦本.
2. International Buddhist Association of Australia. The Buddhist Liturgy, published by IBAA.
3. Fo Guang Shan. Hsi Lai Temple Liturgy. Published by Fo Guang Shan.
4. Imee Ooi, 2007. Ten Short Mantras, Volume 4, published by IMM Musicworks.