妙法莲华经观世音菩萨普门品经

The Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva Universal Gate from the Lotus Sutra

隋北天竺沙门阇那崛多译重颂

Translated [from Sanskrit to Chinese] by the monk Jñānagupta from Northern India during the Sui dyansty.

尔时，无尽意菩萨即从座起，偏袒右肩，合掌向佛，而作是言： 「世尊！观世音菩萨，以何因缘名观世音？」 佛告无尽意菩萨： 「善男子！若有无量百千万亿众生受诸苦恼，闻是观世音菩萨，一心称名，观世音菩萨即时观其音声，皆得解脱。 若有持是观世音菩萨名者，设入大火，火不能烧，由是菩萨威神力故。 若为大水所漂，称其名号，即得浅处。 若有百千万亿众生，为求金、银、琉璃、车璩、马瑙、珊瑚、虎珀、真珠等宝，入于大海，假使黑风吹其船舫，飘堕罗刹鬼国，其中若有，乃至一人，称观世音菩萨名者，是诸人等皆得解脱罗刹之难。 以是因缘，名观世音。

Thereafter the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati rose from his seat, put his upper robe upon one shoulder, stretched his joined hands towards the Buddha, and said: For what reason, O Buddha, is the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara called Avalokitesvara? So he asked, and the Buddha answered to the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati: All the hundred thousands of myriads of kolis of creatures, young man of good family, who in this world are suffering troubles will, if they hear the name of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, be released from that mass of troubles. Those who shall keep the name of this Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, young man of good family, will, if they fall into a great mass of fire, be delivered therefrom by virtue of the lustre of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva. In case, young man of good family, creatures, carried off by the current of rivers, should implore the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, all rivers will afford them a ford. In case,young man of good family, many hundred thousand myriads of kotis of creatures, sailing in a ship on the ocean, should see their gold, silver, lapis lazuli, mother-of-pearl, carnelian, amber, pearls, and other treasures lost, and the ship by a vehement, untimely gale cast on the island of Giantesses, and if in that ship a single being implores Avalokitesvara, all will be saved from that island of Giantesses. For that reason, young man of good family, the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara is named Avalokitesvara.

若复有人临当被害，称观世音菩萨名者，彼所执刀杖寻段段坏，而得解脱。 若三千大千国土，满中夜叉、罗刹，欲来恼人，闻其称观世音菩萨名者，是诸恶鬼，尚不能以恶眼视之，况复加害。 设复有人，若有罪、若无罪，杻械、枷锁检系其身，称观世音菩萨名者，皆悉断坏，即得解脱。 若三千大千国土，满中怨贼，有一商主，将诸商人，齎持重宝、经过嶮路，其中一人作是唱言： 『诸善男子！勿得恐怖，汝等应当一心称观世音菩萨名号。 是菩萨能以无畏施于众生，汝等若称名者，于此怨贼当得解脱。』 众商人闻，俱发声言：『南无观世音菩萨。』 称其名故，即得解脱。 「无尽意！观世音菩萨摩诃萨，威神之力巍巍如是。 若有众生多于婬欲，常念恭敬观世音菩萨，便得离欲。 若多瞋恚，常念恭敬观世音菩萨，便得离瞋。 若多愚痴，常念恭敬观世音菩萨，便得离痴。 「无尽意！观世音菩萨、有如是等大威神力，多所饶益，是故众生常应心念。 若有女人，设欲求男，礼拜供养观世音菩萨，便生福德智慧之男，设欲求女，便生端正有相之女，宿殖德本，众人爱敬。 「无尽意！观世音菩萨有如是力。

If a man given up to capital punishment implores Avalokitesvara, young man of good family, the swords of the executioners shall snap asunder. Further, young man of good family, if the whole triple chiliocosm were teeming with goblins and giants, they would by virtue of the name of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara being pronounced lose the faculty of sight in their wicked designs. If some creature, young man of good family, shall be bound in wooden or iron manacles, chains or fetters, be he guilty or innocent, then those manacles, chains or fetters shall give way as soon as the name of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara is pronounced. Such, young man of good family, is the power of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara. If this whole triple chiliocosm, young man of good family, were teeming with knaves, enemies, and robbers armed with swords, and if a merchant leader of a caravan marched with a caravan rich in jewels; if then they perceived those robbers, knaves, and enemies armed with swords, and in their anxiety and fright thought themselves helpless; if, further, that leading merchant spoke to the caravan in this strain: Be not afraid, young gentlemen, be not frightened; invoke, all of you, with one voice the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, the giver of safety; then you shall be delivered from this danger by which you are threatened at the hands of robbers and enemies; if then the whole caravan with one voice invoked Avalokitesvara with the words: Adoration, adoration be tothe giver of safety, to Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva Mahâsattva! then, by the mere act of pronouncing that name, the caravan would be released from all danger. Such, young man of good family, is the power of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara. In case creatures act under the impulse of impure passion, young man of good family, they will, after adoring the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, be freed from passion. Those who act under the impulse of hatred will, after adoring the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, be freed from hatred. Those who act under the impulse of infatuation will, after adoring the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, be freed from infatuation. So mighty, young man of good family, is the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara. If a woman, desirous of male offspring, young man of good family, adores the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, she shall get a son, nice, handsome, and beautiful; one possessed of the characteristics of a male child, generally beloved and winning, who has planted good roots. If a woman is desirous of getting a daughter, a nice, handsome, beautiful girl shall be born to her; one possessed of the (good) characteristics of a girl, generally beloved and winning, who has planted good roots. Such, young man of good family, is the power of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara.

若有众生，恭敬礼拜观世音菩萨，福不唐捐，是故众生皆应受持观世音菩萨名号。 「无尽意！若有人受持六十二亿恒河沙菩萨名字，复尽形供养饮食、衣服、卧具、医药。 于汝意云何？是善男子、善女人，功德多不？」 无尽意言：「什多，世尊！」 佛言： 「若复有人受持观世音菩萨名号，乃至一时礼拜、供养，是二人福，正等无异，于百千万亿劫不可穷尽。 无尽意！受持观世音菩萨名号，得如是无量无边福德之利。」

Those who adore the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara will derive from it an unfailing profit. Suppose, young man of good family, (on one hand) some one adoring the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara and cherishing his name; (on the other hand) another adoring a number of Lords Buddhas equal to sixty-two times the sands of the river Ganges, cherishing their names and worshipping so many Lords Buddhas during their stay, existence, and life, by giving robes, alms-bowls, couches, medicaments for the sick; how great is then in thine opinion, young man of good family, the accumulation of pious merit which that young gentleman or young lady will produce in consequence of it? So asked, the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati said to the Buddha: Great, O Buddha, great, O Sugata, is the pious merit which that young gentleman or young lady will produce in consequence of it. The Buddha proceeded: Now, young man of good family, the accumulation of pious merit produced by that young gentleman paying homage to so many Lords Buddhas, and the accumulation of pious merit produced by him who performs were it but a single act of adoration to the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara and cherishes his name, are equal. He who adores a number of Lords Buddhas equal to sixty-two times the sands of the river Ganges and cherishes their names, and he who adores the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara and cherishes his name, have an equal accumulation of pious merit; both masses of pious merit are not easy to be destroyed even in hundred thousands of myriads of kotis of Æons. So immense, young man of good family, is the pious merit resulting from cherishing the name of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara.

无尽意菩萨白佛言： 「世尊！观世音菩萨，云何游此娑婆世界？ 云何而为众生说法？方便之力，其事云何？」 佛告无尽意菩萨： 「善男子！若有国土众生，应以佛身得度者，观世音菩萨即现佛身而为说法； 应以辟支佛身得度者，即现辟支佛身而为说法； 应以声闻身得度者，即现声闻身而为说法； 应以梵王身得度者，即现梵王身而为说法； 应以帝释身得度者，即现帝释身而为说法； 应以自在天身得度者，即现自在天身而为说法； 应以大自在天身得度者，即现大自在天身而为说法； 应以天大将军身得度者，即现天大将军身而为说法； 应以毘沙门身得度者，即现毘沙门身而为说法； 应以小王身得度者，即现小王身而为说法； 应以长者身得度者，即现长者身而为说法； 应以居士身得度者，即现居士身而为说法； 应以宰官身得度者，即现宰官身而为说法； 应以婆罗门身得度者，即现婆罗门身而为说法； 应以比丘、比丘尼、优婆塞、优婆夷身得度者，即现比丘、比丘尼、优婆塞、优婆夷身而为说法； 应以长者、居士、宰官、婆罗门妇女身得度者，即现妇女身而为说法； 应以童男、童女身得度者，即现童男、童女身而为说法； 应以天、龙、夜叉、干闼婆、阿修罗、迦楼罗、紧那罗、摩喉罗伽、人非人等身得度者，即皆现之而为说法； 应以執金刚身得度者，即现執金刚身而为说法。 「无尽意！ 是观世音菩萨成就如是功德，以种种形，游诸国土，度脱众生。 是故汝等，应当一心供养观世音菩萨。 是观世音菩萨摩诃萨，于怖畏急难之中能施无畏，是故此娑婆世界，皆号之为施无畏者。」

Again the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati said to the Buddha: How, O Buddha, is it that the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara frequents this Saha-world? And how does he preach the law? And which is the range of the skilfulness of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara? So asked, the Buddha replied to the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati: In some worlds, young man of good family, the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara preaches the law to creatures in the shape of a Buddha; in others he does so in the shape of a Bodhisattva. To some beings he shows the law in the shape of a Pratyekabuddha; to others he does so in the shape of a disciple; to others again under that of Brahma, Indra, or a Gandharva. To those who are to be converted by a goblin, he preaches the law assuming the shape of a goblin; to those who are to be converted by Isvara, he preaches the law in the shape of isvara; to those who are to be converted by Mahesvara, he preaches assuming the shape of Mahesvara. To those who are to be converted by a Kakravartin [This term is ambiguous; it means both 'the mover of the wheel', i.e. Vishnu, and 'an emperor'], he shows the law after assuming the shape of a Kakravartin; to those who are to be converted by an imp, he shows the law under the shape of an imp; to those who are to be converted by Kubera, he shows the law by appearing in the shape of Kubera; to those who are to be converted by Senâpati [Ambiguous; the word denotes both 'the commander-in-chief of the army of the gods, Skanda,' and 'a commander-in-chief in general'], he preaches in the shape of Senapati ; to those who are to be converted by assuming a Brâhman [the Brâhman may be Brihaspati] , he preaches in the shape of a Brâhman; to those who are to be converted by Vagrapâni [Vagrapâni is the name of one of the Dhyânibuddhas, and of certain geniuses, and an ephitet of Indra] , he preaches in the shape of Vagrapâni [The function of Avalokitesvara, as it appears from these passages, agree with those of Gadgadasvara mentioned in the foregoing chapter]. With such inconceivable qualities, young man of good family, is the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara endowed. Therefore then, young man of good family, honour the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara. The Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara, young man of good family, affords safety to those who are in anxiety. On that account one calls him in this Saha-world Abhayandada (i. e. Giver of Safety).

无尽意菩萨白佛言：「世尊！我今当供养观世音菩萨。」 即解颈众宝珠、璎珞，价直百千两金，而以与之，作是言： 「仁者！受此法施珍宝璎珞。」 时观世音菩萨不肯受之。无尽意复白观世音菩萨言：「仁者！愍我等故，受此璎珞。」 尔时佛告观世音菩萨： 「当愍此无尽意菩萨及四众，天、龙、夜叉、干闼婆、阿修罗、迦楼罗、紧那罗、摩喉罗伽、人非人等故，受是璎珞。」 即时观世音菩萨愍诸四众，及于天、龙、人非人等，受其璎珞，分作二分，一分奉释迦牟尼佛，一分奉多宝佛塔。 「无尽意，观世音菩萨有如是自在神力，游于娑婆世界。」

Further, the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati said to the Buddha: Shall we give a gift of piety, a decoration of piety, O Lord, to the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara? The Buddha replied: Do so, if thou thinkest it opportune. Then the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati took from his neck a pearl necklace, worth a hundred thousand (gold pieces), and presented it to the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara as a decoration of piety, with the words: Receive from me this decoration of piety, good man. But he would not accept it. Then the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati said to the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara: Out of compassion to us, young man of good family, accept this pearl necklace. Then the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara accepted the pearl necklace from the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati, out of compassion to the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Akshayamati and the four classes, and out of compassion to the gods, Nâgas, goblins, Gandharvas demons, Garudas, Kinnaras, great serpents, men: and beings not human. Thereafter he divided (the necklace) into two parts, and offered one part to the Buddha Sakyamuni, and the other to the jewel Stupa of the Buddha Prabhûtaratna, the Tathagata, &c., who had become completely extinct.

尔时无尽意菩萨以偈问曰：

Then Akshayamati in the joy of his heart uttered the following stanzas:

「世尊妙相具，　　我今重问彼，

佛子何因缘，　　名为观世音？

Akshayamati asked the following question to the Buddha: For what reason, son of Gina, is Avalokitesvara (so) called?

具足妙相尊，　　偈答无尽意：

『汝听观音行，　　善应诸方所，

And Akshayamati, that ocean of profound insight, after considering how the matter stood, spoke: Listen to the conduct of Avalokitesvara.

弘誓深如海，　　历劫不思议，

侍多千亿佛，　　发大清净愿。

Hear from my indication how for numerous, inconceivable Æons he has accomplished his vote under many thousand kotis of Buddhas.

我为汝略说，　　闻名及见身，

心念不空过，　　能灭诸有苦。

Hearing, seeing, regularly and constantly thinking will infallibly destroy all suffering, (mundane) existence, and grief of living beings here on earth.

假使兴害意，　　推落大火坑，

念彼观音力，　　火坑变成池。

If one be thrown into a pit of fire, by a wicked enemy with the object of killing him, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and the fire shall be quenched as if sprinkled with water.

或漂流巨海，　　龙鱼诸鬼难，

念彼观音力，　　波浪不能没。

If one happens to fall into the dreadful ocean, the abode of Nagas, marine monsters, and demons, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and he shall never sink down in the king of waters.

或在须弥峰，　　为人所推堕，

念彼观音力，　　如日虚空住。

If a man happens to be hurled down from the brink of the Meru, by some wicked person with the object of killing him, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and he shall, sunlike, stand firm in the sky.

或被恶人逐，　　堕落金刚山，

念彼观音力，　　不能损一毛。

If rocks of thunderstone and thunderbolts are thrown at a man's head to kill him, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and they shall not be able to hurt one hair of the body.

或值怨贼绕，　　各执刀加害，

念彼观音力，　　咸即起慈心。

If a man be surrounded by a host of enemies armed with swords, who have the intention of killing him, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and they shall instantaneously become kind-hearted.

或遭王难苦，　　临刑欲寿终，

念彼观音力，　　刀寻段段坏。

If a man, delivered to the power of the executioners, is already standing at the place of execution, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and their swords shall go to pieces.

或囚禁枷锁，　　手足被杻械，

念彼观音力，　　釋然得解脱。

If a person happens to be fettered in shackles of wood or iron, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and the bonds shall be speedily loosened.

咒诅诸毒药，　　所欲害身者，

念彼观音力，　　还着于本人。

Mighty spells, witchcraft, herbs, ghosts, and spectres, pernicious to life, revert thither whence they come, when one thinks of Avalokitesvara.

或遇恶罗刹、　　毒龙诸鬼等，

念彼观音力，　　时悉不敢害。

If a man is surrounded by goblins, Nâgas, demons, ghosts, or giants, who are in the habit of taking away bodily vigour, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and they shall not be able to hurt one hair of his body.

若恶兽围遶，　　利牙爪可怖，

念彼观音力，　　疾走无边方。

If a man is surrounded by fearful beasts with .sharp teeth and claws, he has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and they shall quickly fly in all directions.

蚖蛇及蝮蝎，　　气毒烟火燃，

念彼观音力，　　寻声自迴去。

If a man is surrounded by snakes malicious and frightful on account of the flames and fires (they emit), be has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and they shall quickly lose their poison.

云雷鼓掣电，　　降雹澍大雨，

念彼观音力，　　应时得消散。

If a heavy thunderbolt shoots from a cloud pregnant with lightning and thunder, one has but to think of Avalokitesvara, and the fire of heaven shall quickly, instantaneously be quenched.

众生被困厄，　　无量苦逼身，

观音妙智力，　　能救世间苦。

He (Avalokitesvara) with his powerful knowledge beholds all creatures who are beset with many hundreds of troubles and afflicted by many sorrows, and thereby is a saviour in the world, including the gods.

具足神通力，　　广修智方便，

十方诸国土，　　无刹不现身。

As he is thoroughly practised in the power of magic, and possessed of vast knowledge and skilfulness, he shows himself' in all directions and in all regions of the world.

种种诸恶趣，　　地狱鬼畜生，

生老病死苦，　　以渐悉令灭。

Birth, decrepitude, and disease will come to an end for those who are in the wretched states of existence, in hell, in brute creation, in the kingdom of Yama, for all beings (in general).

真观清净观，　　广大智慧观，

悲观及慈观，　　常愿常瞻仰。

O thou whose eyes are clear, whose eyes are kind, distinguished by wisdom and knowledge, whose eyes are full of pity and benevolence; thou so lovely by thy beautiful face and beautiful eyes!

无垢清净光，　　慧日破诸暗，

能伏灾风火，　　普明照世间。

Pure one, whose shine is spotless bright, whose knowledge is free from darkness, thou shining as the sun, not to be beaten away, radiant as the blaze of fire, thou spreadest in thy flying course thy lustre in the world.

悲体戒雷震，　　慈意妙大云，

澍甘露法雨，　　灭除烦恼焰。

O thou who rejoicest in kindness having its source in compassion, thou great cloud of good qualities and of benevolent mind, thou quenchest the fire that vexes living beings, thou pourest out nectar, the rain of the law.

诤讼经官处，　　怖畏军阵中，

念彼观音力，　　众怨悉退散。

In quarrel, dispute, war, battle, in any great danger one has to think of Avalokitesvara, who shall quell the wicked troop of foes.

妙音观世音，　　梵音海潮音，

胜彼世间音，　　是故须常念，

One should think of Avalokitesvara, whose sound is as the cloud's and the drum's, who thunders like a rain-cloud, possesses a good voice like Brahma, (a voice) going through the whole gamut of tones. He who possesses the perfection of all virtues, and beholds all beings with compassion and benevolence, he, an ocean of virtues, Virtue itself, he, Avalokitesvara, is worthy of adoration.

念念勿生疑。　　观世音净圣，

于苦恼死厄，　　能为作依怙

He, so compassionate for the world, shall once become a Buddha, destroying all dangers and sorrows; I humbly bow to Avalokitesvara.

具一切功德，　　慈眼视众生，

福聚海无量，　　是故应顶礼。』」

He, so compassionate for the world, shall once become a Buddha, destroying all dangers and sorrows; I humbly bow to Avalokitesvara.

尔时持地菩萨即从座起，前白佛言：

Thereupon the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Dharanindhara rose from his seat, put his upper robe upon one shoulder, fixed his right knee against the earth, stretched his joined hands towards the Buddha and said:

「世尊！若有众生，闻是观世音菩萨品自在之业，普门示现神通力者，当知是人功德不少。」

They must be possessed of not a few good roots, O Buddha, who are to hear this chapter from the Dharmaparyâya about the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara and this miraculous power of transformation of the Bodhisattva Mahâsattva Avalokitesvara.

佛说是普门品时，众中八万四千众生，皆发无等等阿耨多罗三藐三菩提心。

And while this chapter of the All-sided One was being expounded by the Buddha, eighty-four thousand living beings from that assembly felt their minds drawn to that supreme and perfect enlightenment, with which nothing else can be compared.

<h3>Notes</h3>
1. Orginal text from <a href="http://www.cbeta.org/result/normal/T09/0262_007.htm">CBETA</a>.
2. The Universal Gate Sutra is chapter 24 of the Lotus Sutra.
3. For the English text and interpretation see Hsing Yun, "The Universal Gate: A Commentary on Avalokitesvara's Universal Gate", 2011, Buddha's Light Publishing, Los Angeles, ISBN 978-1-932293-48-7.
4. The English text here is based on the translation By H. Kern (1884) www.sacred-texts.com/bud/lotus/index.htm.
I have made edits to the English text in the Simplified Chinese — English dual language version. The Chinese and English texts match closely but it could be that the version that Kern translated was not exactly as the CBETA text given here. The biggest difference is that Kern's version describes the Buddha reciting a group of lines in verse, whereas the Chinese version and Vernable Hsing Yun's text describes Akshayamati as reciting all of the lines of verse. I have replaced some of Kern's terms with more modern terms that we are familiar with today. In particular, referring the Buddha as the Buddha rather than as the Lord Buddha.