<a href="corpus_entry.php?uri=medicine_buddha_sutra.md">Text Information</a>

Original text from Xuan Zang and matching English translation

藥師琉璃光如來本願功德經
Sutra of the Vows of the Medicine Buddha of Lapis Lazuli Crystal Radiance

唐三藏法師玄奘奉 诏譯
Translated by imperial order by Tang Monk Xuan Zang

乾隆大藏經·大乘五大部外重譯經·第167部

Qian Long Tripitaka, Mahayana Sutras in Five Parts, Section 167

藥師琉璃光如來本願功德經

Sutra of the Vows of the Medicine Buddha of Lapis Lazuli Crystal Radiance

如是我聞：薄伽梵遊化諸國，至廣嚴城住樂音樹下，與大苾蒭眾八千人俱，菩薩摩訶薩三萬六千，及國王、大臣、婆羅門、居士，天、龍、藥叉、人非人等，無量大眾恭敬圍繞而為說法。

Thus I have heard, one time the Bhagavan was travelling through many lands he arrived at the city of Vaisalli and stayed under the Joyful Tree of Musical Breezes with innumerable crowds of people and other beings, including 8000 senior monks, 36000 bodhisattvas, the king and his ministers, Brahmins, lay people, devas, dragons, yaksas. They offered respect by circumambulating and he taught the Dharma.

爾時，曼殊室利法王子，承佛威神從座而起，偏袒一肩，右膝著地，向薄伽梵曲躬合掌白言：“世尊，唯願 演說如是相類諸佛名號，及本大願殊勝功德，令諸聞者業障銷除，為欲利樂像法轉時諸有情故。”

At that time Manjusri, the Prince of the Dharma, stood up from his seat and solemnly addressed the Buddha. He bared one shoulder and kneeled with his right knee on the ground. Bowing towards the Bhagavan with joined palms he said, “World Honored One, please tell us the names of all the Buddhas, their vows and unique achievements and virtue so that the beings listening can avoid all karmic hindrances for the joy and blessing of those who live at the Period of Semblance Dharma.”

爾時，世尊讚曼殊室利童子言：“善哉！善哉！曼殊室利，汝以大悲勸請我說諸佛名號本願功德，為拔業障所纏有情，利益安樂像法轉時諸有情故。”汝今諦聽，極善思惟，當為汝說。”

The World Honored One praised Manjusri like a son saying, “Excellent, Manjusri! As you compassionately urge me to speak of the names of all the Buddhas, their vows, achievements and virtue so that the beings listening can avoid karmic hindrances, benefit and live peacefully in the Period of Semblance Dharma. Since you are listening attentively and thinking extremely virtuously, I will speak as you have asked.”

曼殊室利言：“唯然願說，我等樂聞。”

Manjusri said, “We will listen joyfully to what you say.”

佛告曼殊室利：“東方去此過十殑伽沙等佛土，有世界名淨琉璃，佛號藥師琉璃光如來、應、正等覺、明行圓滿、善逝、世間解、無上丈夫、調禦士、天人師、佛、薄伽梵。曼殊室利，勝佛世尊藥師琉璃光如來，本行菩薩道時髮十二大願，令諸有情所求皆得。

The Buddha said to Manjusri, “To the East there are Buddha lands ten times as numerous as the Ganges. There is a world there called the the Realm of Pure Crystal and the Buddha there has epithets including the Medicine Buddha of Crystal Radiance, Worthy of Offerings, Absolute Universal Englightened Awareness, Activity of Full Brightness, Immaculately Departed One, Transcendent Understanding of the Ordinary World, Unexcelled One, the One who Tames and Harmonizes, Teacher of Devas and Human Beings, the Awakened One, and the Bhagavan. Manjusri, when the Medicine Buddha was on the Bodhisattva Path he made twelve great vows to lead all beings to obtain what they seek.

“第一大愿，願我來世得阿耨多羅三藐三菩提時，自身光明炽然，照曜無量無數無邊世界，以三十二大丈夫相、八十隨好莊嚴其身，令一切有情如我無異。

“First vow: In a future life I will have obtained anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. My body will emit a brilliant blaze of light without limit that will illuminate innumerable worlds and will be adorned and thirty two marks of excellence and eighty noble qualities. I will lead all sentient beings to become equal to me.

“第二大愿，願我來世得菩提時，身如琉璃，內外明徹淨無瑕穢，光明廣大，功德巍巍，身善安住，焰網莊嚴過於日月，幽冥眾生悉矇開曉，隨意所趣作諸事業。

“Second vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment my body will be like lapis lazuli, clear inside and outside without fault, emitting vast light, towering achievements and virtue, virtuous and steady, a blazing net of stately light exceeding the sun and moon, the beings in Hell knowing only darkness will see the dawn and will be able to do as the please.

“第三大愿，願我來世得菩提時，以無量無邊智慧方便，令諸有情皆得無盡所受用物，莫令眾生有所乏少。

“Third vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, through immeasurable and boundless wisdom and skillful means I will lead all sentient beings to obtain all the material things that they need without limit so that they do not lack for anything.

“第四大願，願我來世得菩提時，若諸有情行邪道者，悉令安住菩提道中；若行聲聞、獨覺乘者，皆以大乘而安立之。

“Forth vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, I will lead all beings who have followed evil ways to follow a steady path to enlightenment; those who follow a Sravaka or Pratyeka-Buddha path to the Mahayana path.

“第五大愿，願我來世得菩提時，若有無量無邊有情，於我法中修行梵行，一切皆令得不缺戒，具三聚戒。設有毀犯，聞我名已，還得清凈，不墮惡趣。

“Fifth vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, may all sentient beings who practice with me live peacefully and free from desires, each observing their vows according to the Tri-Vidhani Silani. If there are any violations then they can be purified by reciting my name and will be prevented from falling into evil.

“第六大愿，願我來世得菩提時，若諸有情，其身下劣，諸根不具，醜陋、頑愚，盲、聾、喑啞、攣躄、背偻、白癩、癲狂種種病苦，聞我名已，一切皆得端正黠慧，諸根完具，無諸疾苦。

“Sixth vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, if any sentient being with a physically inferior form, an inadequate organ of sense, is ugly, is mentally deficient, is blind, is deaf, has crippled arms and legs, has leprosy, is mentally deranged, or any kind of suffering due to sickness if they recite my name then their problems will be rectified. They will become intelligent, all sense organs will be perfect, and will have no ailments.

“第七大愿，願我來世得菩提時，若諸有情，眾病逼切，無救無歸，無醫無藥，無親無家，貧窮多苦，我之名號一經其耳，眾病悉得除，身心安樂，家屬資具悉皆豐足，乃至證得無上菩提。

“Seventh vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, if sentient being who suffers from disease, who has no body to help them and no way to end their own suffering, no doctor and no medicine, no relatives and no family, and are impoverished with much grief, hears my name then their suffering will end. They will receive peace and happiness in body and spirit. Their family will have abundant household items. They may even attain unsurpassed enlightenment.

“第八大愿，願我來世得菩提時，若有女人，為女百惡之所逼惱，極生厭離願舍女身，聞我名已，一切皆得轉女成男具丈夫相，乃至證得無上菩提。

“Eighth vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, if there are any women suffering by the hundred torments of the female sex, who are oppressed in their female form and want to give it up, and if they hear my name they bodies will be born as males in the next life in the form of a great man and may even attain unsurpassed enlightenment.

“第九大愿，願我來世得菩提時，令諸有情出魔罥網，解脫一切外道缠缚。若墮種種惡見稠林，皆當引攝置於正見，漸令修习諸菩薩行，速證無上正等菩提。

“Ninth vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, I will lead all sentient beings to escape from the evil net of Mara and free them from the traps of other religions. If there are people who fall into a dense forest of false views then I will lead them to have a proper understanding, gradually practice the bodhisattva way, and then speedily attain unsurpassed enlightenment.

“第十大愿，願我來世得菩提時，若諸有情，王法所録，縲縛鞭撻，繫閉牢獄，或當刑戮，及餘無量災難凌辱，悲愁煎迫，身心受苦，若聞我名，以我福德威神力故，皆得解脫一切憂苦。

“Tenth vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, if there are sentient beings who are judged according the laws to be punished by whipping, being bound, incarceration in prison, sentenced for execution, suffer innumerable insults, be tormented, suffer physical and spiritual hardships, if they hear my name, through my good moral conduct and powerful divine power they will be relieved of all worry and suffering.

“第十一大愿，願我來世得菩提時，若諸有情，飢渴所惱，為求食故造諸惡業，得聞我名專念受持，我當先以上妙飲食飽足其身，後以法味畢竟安樂而建立之。

“Eleventh vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, if there are sentient beings who suffer from hunger and thirst and the need to find food leads then to perform evil actions if they hear my name and accept it with reverence, I will lead them to have wonderful food and drink to satisfy the physical needs and, afterwards, use the flavor of the Dharma to lead every one of them build a peaceful and happy life.

“第十二大愿，願我來世得菩提時，若諸有情，貧無衣服，蚊虻寒熱晝夜逼惱，若聞我名專念受持，如其所好即得種種上妙衣服，亦得一切寶莊嚴具，華鬘、塗香、鼓樂、眾伎，隨心所玩，皆令滿足。

“Twelfth vow: In a future life when I have obtained enlightenment, if there are sentient beings poor and without clothing, they are bitten by bugs day and night and subjected to hot and cold, if they hear my name and accept it with reverence, they will receive as many kinds of wonderful clothes as they wish and also stately utensils, hair tied like a flower, pursue handicrafts, be annointed, play music, or do whatever their hearts desire to be satisfied.

“曼殊室利，是為勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來、應、正等覺，行菩薩道時所髮十二微妙上願。

Manjusri, these are the twelve vows made by the Medicine Buddha after having obtained complete enlightenment when he was on the Bodhisattva Path.

“復次，曼殊室利，勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來行菩薩道時，所髮大愿及勝佛土功德莊嚴，我若一劫、若一劫餘說不能盡。然勝佛土一向清凈，無有女人，亦無惡趣及苦音聲，琉璃為地，金繩界道，城闕、宮閣、軒窗、羅網皆七寶成，亦如西方極樂世界功德莊嚴等無差別。於其國中有二菩薩摩訶薩，一名日光遍照，二名月光遍照，是勝無量無數菩薩眾之上首，悉能持勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來正法寶藏。是故，曼殊室利，諸有信心善男子、善女人等，應當願生勝佛世界。”

Manjusri, I could not fully describe the vows that the Medicine Buddha made at the time he was on the Bodhisattva Path that and the stately achievements and virtue of the Buddha land in an entire kalpa or more. The Buddha land is forever pure, there are no women, no evil and no sounds of suffering. The ground is made of lapis lazuli, the boundaries are made of gold ropes, the windows in the city watch towers and palace halls, and pavilions are made of nets of the seven treasures, as stately as the Western Pure Land. Among the innumerable bodhisattvas in the land the two greatest bodhisattvas and Radiant Sunlight Bodhisattva and Radiant Moonlight Bodhisattva who excel in upholding the Dharma of the Medicine Buddha.

爾時，世尊復告曼殊師利童子言：“曼殊室利，有諸眾生不識善惡，唯懷貪吝，不知布施及施果報，愚癡無智，闕於信根，多聚財寶勤加守護，見乞者來其心不喜，設不獲已而行施時，如割身肉深生痛惜。復有無量慳貪有情，積集資財，於其自身尚不受用，何況能與父母、妻子、奴婢、作使及來乞者？勝諸有情從此命終，生餓鬼界或傍生趣，由昔人間曾得暫聞藥師琉璃光如來名故，今在惡趣暫得憶念勝如來名，即於念時從勝處沒還生人中，得宿命念，畏惡趣苦，不樂欲樂，好行惠施，贊嘆施者，一切所有悉無貪惜，漸次尚能以頭、目、手、足、血、肉、身分施來求者，況餘財物！

Then, continuing again, the World-Honored One spoke to the boy Manjusri, “Manjusri, there are sentient beings that do not know the difference between good and evil. They only think of greed and hoarding and do not know the benefit of the practice of giving. They are ignorant and have no basic faith so they hoard money and valuables, guarding them diligently. They are unhappy when the meet beggars not being able to bear to give them anything as if it was as painful as cutting off a piece of their own flesh. These beings with infinite greed accumulate wealth and riches and do not even use them for themselves, their parents, wife, slaves and servants. How much less would they consider giving anything to a beggar? After these beings die they will be reborn in the Realm of Hungry Ghosts or as an animal. But because when they were in the Human Realm and briefly had the chance to hear the Medicine Buddhas' name. Now in a hell realm if they can remember the Tathagata's name then they will be free from the suffering of their evil destiny and reborn in the human world. Remembering the hell realm they will not take joy in sensual pleasures but have take pleasure in good conduct, practice charity, and encourage others to do so as well. Gradually, they will even be able to give their heads, eyes, hands, feet, blood, flesh, and other body parts, not to mention goods and money.

“复次，曼殊室利，若諸有情，雖於如來受諸學處，而破尸羅；有雖不破尸羅，而破軌則；有於尸羅、軌則雖得不壞，然毀正見；有雖不毀正見，而棄多聞，於佛所說契經深義不能解了；有雖多聞而增上慢，由增上慢覆蔽心故，自是非他，嫌謗正法，為魔伴黨。如是愚人自行邪見，復令無量俱胝有情墮大險坑。此諸有情，應於地獄、傍生、鬼趣流轉無窮，若得聞此藥師琉璃光如來名號，便舍惡行，修諸善法，不墮惡趣。設有不能舍諸惡行、修行善法墮惡趣者，以勝如來本願威力，令其現前暫聞名號，從勝命終還生人趣，得正見精進，善調意樂，便能舍家趣於非家如來法中，受持學處無有毀犯，正見多聞解甚深義，離增上慢，不謗正法，不為魔伴，漸次修行諸菩薩行速得圓滿。

Moreover, Manjusri, there are sentient beings that, even after receiving teachings from the Tathagata, still break their vows. There are sentient beings that, although not having broken their vows, they have broken the regulations. There are also those that, although they have not broken their vows or the regulations, have disparaged right views. Although not having disparaged right views there are those that have abandoned deep study of the Dharma and cannot understand the profound meaning of the Buddha's teaching. There are those that, although studying the Dharma deeply have become conceited, which clouds their minds and leads them to believe that they are right and others wrong. Thus they dislike correct views and become allies of evil. Thus such deluded people follow perverse views themselves but also cause innumerable other sentient beings to fall into a dangerous pit. These beings should go to Hell, the Animal Realm, or Hungry Ghost Realm and be reborn there endlessly but if they hear the Medicine Buddha's name, they will give up evil ways, practice charity, and be avoid descending into Hell. Even those who have descended into a Hell realm because they cannot give up their evil vices and cannot conduct themselves in a virtuous manner may be saved by the great power of the Medicine Buddha's vows. This can lead them to hear the name of the Medicine Buddha momentarily and be reborn in the human realm. The will obtain proper views, desire to improve themselves, pursue a healthy livelihood, and be joyous. They will become monastics and uphold their precepts, and live according to the regulations of the Tathagata. With continued study they will comprehend the profound meaning of the Dharma. They will not be arrogant, not disparage the true Dharma, not be partners of evil. They will gradually practice the Bodhisattva Path and quickly perfect those practices.

“复次，曼殊室利，若諸有情慳貪、嫉妒、自赞毀他，當墮三惡道中，無量千歲受諸劇苦。受劇苦已，從勝命終來生人間，作牛、馬、駝、驢，恆被鞭撻，飢渴逼惱，又常負重隨路而行。或得為人，生居下賤作人奴婢，受他驅役恆不自在。若昔人中，曾聞世尊藥師琉璃光如來名號，由此善因，今復憶念，至心歸依，以佛驅役眾苦解脫，諸根聰利，智慧多聞，恆求勝法，常遇善友，永斷魔罥，破無明殻，竭煩惱河，解脫一切生老病死憂愁苦惱。

Moreover, Manjusri, there are many sentient beings who are greedy, envious, and boastful while disparaging others. They will be reborn in one of the three evil realms and suffer there for innumerable thousands of years. When that suffering comes to an end they will be reborn as oxen, horses, camels, or donkeys and be whipped and suffer from hunger and thirst and other vexations and be forced to carry heavy loads. If they are reborn as humans then it will be in degrading lives as slave servants, being used by other people, not being free. However, if any of these people, in a past life as a human, heard the name of the Medicine Buddha and, through good conduct, later remembers that and takes refuge in him then through the divine powers of the Medicine Buddha those people will be relieved of all suffering. They will be clever, have acute sense, be wise and seeking supreme teachings, always meet with virtuous friends, be able to break the net of Mara and the shell of ignorance, dry up the river of afflictions. They will be liberated from the anxiety and suffering of the cycle of birth, old age, sickness, and death.

“复次，曼殊室利，若諸有情好喜乖離，更相鬥訟，惱亂自他，以身語意造作增長種種惡業，展轉常為不饒益事互相謀害，告召山林樹冢等神，殺諸眾生，取其血肉祭祀藥叉、羅剎娑等，書怨人名，作其形像，以惡咒術而咒咀之，厭媚、蠱道、咒起屍鬼，令斷勝命及壞其身。是諸有情，若得聞此藥師琉璃光如來名號，勝諸惡事悉不能害，一切展轉皆起慈心，利益安樂，無損惱意及嫌恨心，各各歡悅於自所受，生於喜足，不相侵凌，互為饒益。

Moreover, Manjusri, if there are sentient beings deviate from good conduct, quarrel, and disturb others. They increase all kinds of karma with their evil actions. They conspire against other people for their own benefit. They invoke spirits of mountains, forests, trees, and tombs while killing other sentient beings using their flesh to offer as sacrifices to yaksas and raksasas. Those beings write down the names and use images of the people that they have grudges against and then curse those people with evil curses. They purse the people that they loath, flatter, and then poison them, or harm them with ghosts that they have raised from the dead. Of all sentient beings who have heard the Medicine Buddha's name, their evil deeds will not be able to harm them and they will practice beneficial deeds, achieving peace and happiness. They will not harbor anger and a hateful mind, each being joyful for what they have living with contented happiness. They will not violate the rights of others but rather strive for the benefit of others.

“复次，曼殊室利，若有四眾：苾蒭、苾蒭尼、鄔波索迦、鄔波斯迦，及餘淨信善男子、善女人等，有能受持八分齋戒，或經一年、或復三月受持學處，以此善根願生西方極樂世界無量壽佛所，聽聞正法；而未定者，若聞世尊藥師琉璃光如來名號，臨命終時有八菩薩（其名曰：文殊師利菩薩、觀世音菩薩、得大勢菩薩、無盡意菩薩、寶檀華菩薩、藥王菩薩、藥上菩薩、彌勒菩薩），乘神通來示其道路，即於勝界種種雜色眾寶華中自然化生。或有因此生於天上，雖生天中而本善根亦未窮盡，不復更生諸餘惡趣；天上壽盡還生人間，或為輪王统摄四洲，威德自在，安立無量百千有情於十善道；或生刹帝利、婆羅門、居士大家，多饒財寶，倉庫盈溢，形相端嚴，眷屬具足，聰明智慧，勇健威猛如大力士。若是女人得聞世尊藥師如來名號，至心受持，於後不復更受女身。”

Moreover, Manjusri, there are those in the fourfold assembly of monks, nuns, male laypeople, and female laypeople, as well as other virtuous men and women of pure faith who are able to uphold the Eight Precepts for a year or for three months at a place of study and hence the wish to be reborn in the Western Pure Land of Amitabha Buddha will take root in them and they will hear the true Dharma. However, for those whose rebirth in a Pure Land is uncertain and they hear the name of the World Honored One, the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance, then at the time of their death the Eight Great Bodhisattvas Manjusri, Avalokitesvara, Mahasthamaprapta, Aksayamati, Treasure of Sandalwood Flower Bodhisattva, Bhaisajyaraja Bodhisattva, Bhaisajya-Samudgata Bodhisattva, and Maitreya will use their magical abilities to show the way. Also, because of this there are some that are born in celestial realms. Even though they were born in the celestial realms their good root are not yet exhausted and they will not be reborn in any of the evil realms. When their celestial lifes come to an end they will be reborn as people, perhaps becoming wheel turning kings ruling over the four continents, at ease with a powerful, benevolent rule, establishing paths for innumerable sentient beings to live according to the ten virtues. Or they will be reborn as Ksatriyah, Brahman, or lay Buddhists, avoiding money and valuables, with storehouses brim over, stately appearances, plentiful household goods, intelligent and wise, and brave, healthy, bold, and powerful like great warriors. If women are able to hear the name of the World Honored Medicine Buddha, accept and maintain faith then they will not be born with female bodies again in future lives.

爾時，曼殊室利童子白佛言：“世尊，我當誓於像法轉時，以種種方便，令諸淨信善男子、善女人等，得聞世尊藥師琉璃光如來名號，乃至睡中亦以佛名覺悟其耳。世尊，若於此經受持讀誦，或復為他 演說開示，若自書，若教人書，恭敬尊重，以種種華香、塗香、末香、燒香、華鬘、瓔珞、幡蓋、伎樂而為供養，以五色彩作囊盛之，掃灑淨處，敷設高座而用安處，爾時四大天王與其眷屬及餘無量百千天眾，皆詣其所供養守護。世尊，若此經寶流行之處有能受持，以勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來本願功德及聞名號，當知是處無復橫死，亦復不為諸惡鬼神奪其精氣；設已奪者，還得如故，身心安樂。”

Then the boy Manjusri said to the Buddha, “World Honored One, I vow in the Period of Semblance Dharma to use all kinds of skillful means to lead all men of pure faith and all virtuous women to hear the name of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance and even to become aware of the Buddha's name in their sleep. World Honored One, if there are people who continually recite this sutra, repeatedly give speeches to inspire others from this sutra, or teach this sutras to others and offer all kinds of incense, paste incense, powdered incense, with their hair tied like a flower, with ornament decorating their bodies, scroll style canopies, and musicians. With multi-colored bags to hold goods, sweep and wipe the group clean, and lay out tall seats to make a safe place, then at that time the Four Deva Kings, their families, and an innumerable number of other heavenly dieties will defend those offerings. World Honored One, if there are people who accept and maintain faith in the places where this treasured sutra spreads to and they hear the vows, virtue, and name of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance, then after that time they will not again die as victims of violence and their spirit will never again be taken by an evil demon or deity. Those whose spirits have already been taken will be returned so that they can be peaceful and happy in body and mind.

佛告曼殊室利：“如是，如是，如汝所說。曼殊室利，若有淨信善男子、善女人等，欲供養勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來者，應先造立勝佛形像，敷清凈座而安處之，散種種華，燒種種香，以種種幢幡莊嚴其處，七日七夜受持八分齋戒，食清凈食，澡浴香潔著新淨衣。應生無垢濁心、無怒害心，於一切有情起利益安樂、慈悲喜舍平等之心，鼓樂歌讚，右繞佛像。復應念勝如來本願功德，讀誦此經，思惟其義， 演說開示，隨所樂求一切皆遂，求長壽得長壽，求富饒得富饒，求官位得官位，求男女得男女。若復有人忽得惡夢，見諸惡相或怪鳥來集，或於住處百怪出現，此人若以眾妙資具，恭敬供養勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來者，惡夢惡相諸不吉祥皆悉隱沒不能為患。或有水、火、刀、毒、懸崄、惡象、師子、虎、狼、熊羆、毒蛇、惡蠍、蜈蚣、蚰蜓、蚊、虻等怖，若能至心憶念勝佛恭敬供養，一切怖畏皆得解脫。若他國侵擾、盜賊反亂，憶念恭敬勝如來者亦皆解脫。

The Buddha said to Manjusri, “It is as you say. Manjusri, if there are men of pure faith and virtuous women who desire to make offerings to the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance then they should first take a statue of the Buddha, sit peacefully in a quite place, spread different kinds of flowers and burn incense, and hang many stately banners. They should observe the Eight Precepts for seven days and seven nights, eat in silence, bathe so that they are fragrant and clean, and wear new, clean clothes. They should cleanse their hearts of impurity, having no thoughts of anger or hostility, wish all sentient beings well with peace and happiness, do compassionate, good deeds with an undiscriminating mind, play music with songs of praise, and circumambulate around an image of the Buddha. Moreover, they should recite the vows and virtues of the Tathagata, recite this sutra, think about their own actions, speak in an enlightened manner, and then all their desires will be fulfilled. If they seek longevity then they will obtain longevity. If they seek wealth then they will obtain wealth. If they seek an official post then they will obtain an official post. If they seek a male or female partner then they will obtain a male or female partner. Moreover, if there are people who suddenly have nightmares, see bad omens or strange birds gathering, together, or many demons appear at their home and if those people make offerings of household goods to the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance, then the nightmares, bad omens, and all other inauspicious things will vanish and will not be able to cause those people harm. If there is anyone with a fear of flood, fire, fire, knife, poison, landslide, rogue elephant, lion, tiger, wolf, brown bear, venomous snake, scorpion, centipede, dragonfly, mosquito, or fly and those people remember to make a respectful offering to the Medicine Buddha then they will be liberated from all their fears. If his country has been invaded, suffered from an armed rebellion and the person remembers the Medicine Buddha with respect then they will be liberated.

“复次，曼殊室利，若有淨信善男子、善女人等，乃至盡形不事餘天，唯當一心歸佛法僧受持禁戒，若五戒、十戒、菩薩四百戒、苾蒭二百五十戒、苾蒭尼五百戒，於所受中或有毀犯怖墮惡趣，若能專念勝佛名號、恭敬供養者，必定不受三惡趣生。或有女人臨當產時受於極苦，若能至心稱名、禮讚、恭敬供養勝如來者，眾苦皆除，所生之子身分具足，形色端正，見者歡喜，利根聰明，安隱少病，無有非人奪其精氣。”

“Moreover, Manjusri, if there are good men of pure faith and virtuous women, even if their appearances are not heavenly, and if they wholeheartedly take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, accept and maintain faith and take the vows of the the Five Precepts, the Ten Precepts, the bodhisattva four hundred precepts, a monk's three hundred and fifty precepts, or a nun's five hundred precepts, then that will prevent an evil rebirth. If they can focus their thoughts to remember the Medicine Buddha's name and make respectful offerings then they will certainly not be reborn in any of the three evil realms. Or if there are women approaching the time to give birth and they are in extreme pain and they are able to wholeheartedly call the name of the Medicine Buddha, praise, and respectfully worship the Medicine Buddha then all their pain will be cleared away and they will give birth to a fully healthy son with regular body and countenance and be joyful on seeing him clever and with natural powers of intelligence, serene and without sickness. No demon will be able to take his spirit.

爾時，世尊告阿難言：“如我稱揚勝佛世尊藥師琉璃光如來所有功德，此是諸佛甚深行處，難可解了，汝為信不？”

Then the World Honored One addressed Ananda saying, “This I praise the virtues of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance. This is the result of profound practice of all Buddhas in all places. It is hard to fathom. Do you believe it?”

阿難白言：“大德世尊，我於如來所說契經不生疑惑。所以者何？一切如來身語意業無不清凈。世尊，此日月輪可令墮落，妙高山王可使傾動，諸佛所言無有異也。世尊，有諸眾生信根不具，聞說諸佛甚深行處，作是思惟：‘云何但念藥師琉璃光如來一佛名號便獲爾所功德勝利？’由此不信，反生誹謗，勝於長夜失大利樂，墮諸惡趣流轉無窮。”

Ananda said the Buddha, “Virtuous World Honored One, I do not have any doubt about the words spoken by you and carved in the sutras. Why is this so? All the actions and words flowing from the Tathagata are completely pure. World Honored One, even if the Sun and Moon fall from the sky, great mountains shake, there is no doubt about any of the words spoken by the Buddha. World Honored One, some people who have little faith hear of the Buddha's profound practice and think, ‘How could it be that just by calling the name of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance someone could obtain all these virtues?’ Because of this disbelief they engage in slander. They remain in a long period of misery and oppression, losing great benefits and joy and degenerating in evil rebirths where they circulate endlessly.”

佛告阿難：“是諸有情，若聞世尊藥師琉璃光如來名號，至心受持不生疑惑，墮惡趣者無有是處。阿難，此是諸佛甚深所行，難可信解。汝今能受，當知皆是如來威力。阿難，一切聲聞、獨覺及未登地諸菩薩等，皆悉不能如實信解，唯除一生所繫菩薩。阿難，人身難得，於三寶中信敬尊重亦難可得，得聞世尊藥師琉璃光如來名號復難於是。阿難，勝藥師琉璃光如來無量菩薩行、無量善巧方便、無量廣大願，我若一劫、若一劫餘而廣說者，劫可速盡，勝佛行願善巧方便無有盡也。”

The Buddha said to Ananda, “For all those sentient beings that hear the name of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance if they sincerely accept and maintain faith without uncertainty there will be no way for them to have an evil rebirth. Ananda, this is the extremely profound practice of all the Buddhas, which is difficult to understand. You can accept it today because of the power of the Tathagata. Ananda, all Sravaka, Pratyeka-buddha, and those bodhisattvas who have not yet ascended the first ten stages are not able to fathom this except those that have only one more life remaining as a bodhisattva. Ananda, it is a rare and difficult to be able to believe and revere the Triple Gem during a person's life and to hear the name of the World Honored Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance is even more difficult. Ananda, the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance has performed immeasurable bodhisattva practice, used immeasurable and ingenious skillful means to help sentient beings, and taken extensive vows. Even if I talked about this for a kalpa or more than a kalpa I could not finish speaking about it. The kalpa would be quickly used up describing it but the Medicine Buddha's practice of his vows and ingenious skillful means are inexhaustible.”

爾時，眾中有一菩薩摩訶薩，名曰救脫，即從座起，偏袒右肩，右膝著地，曲躬合掌，而白佛言：“大德世尊，像法轉時，有諸眾生，為種種患之所睏困，長病羸瘦不能飲食，喉唇乾燥，見諸方暗，死相現前，父母、親屬、朋友、知識啼泣圍繞。然勝自身臥在本处，見琰魔使引其神識至於琰魔法王之前。然諸有情有俱生神，隨其所作若罪若福皆具書之，盡持授與琰魔法王。爾時，勝王推問其人，算計所作隨其罪福而處斷之。時勝病人親屬知識，若能為勝歸依世尊藥師琉璃光如來，請諸眾僧轉讀此經，燃七層之燈，懸五色續命神幡，或有是處勝識得還，如在夢中明瞭自見。或經七日、或二十一日、或三十五日、或四十九日，勝識還時如從夢覺，皆自憶知善不善業所得果報。由自證見業果報故，乃至命難亦不造作諸惡之業。是故淨信善男子、善女人等，皆應受持藥師琉璃光如來名號，隨力所能恭敬供養。”

At that time there was a great bodhisattva called Salvation in the crowd who arose from his seat. He bared his right shoulder and with his right knee the ground bowed with joined palms and said to the Buddha, “Virtuous World Honored One, in the Period of Semblance Dharma there are many sentient beings who suffer all kinds of misfortune. They grow sick, becoming thin and weak not being able to take food and drink. Their throats and lips become dry, they see darkness all around, and signs of death appear in front of them. Their mothers and fathers, family and friends, and acquaintances weep and circle around them. So they lie in their beds and Mara will come to lead their souls before the Lord of Death. Then the sentient beings and their accompanying spirits who record all the actions of the sentient beings, whether the actions be good deeds or sins, and explain each of the actions to the Lord of Death. At that time the Lord of Death will interrogate each person calculating all their good and evil actions and judge them accordingly. Then the sick person's family members and acquaintances, if they are able to take refuge in the World Honored Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance, will request many monks to recite a this sutra, light seven layers of lamps, hang multi-colored longevity banners, or perform similar practices. The sick person will see themself, as if in a dream, whether for seven days, twenty one days, thirty five days, or forty nine days. They will awake from the dream and clearly remember all their good and evil deeds as well as the karmic consequences. This will prove to themselves the connection between actions and karma. Afterwards they will not perform actions that lead to bad karma even at risk of their own lifes. Consequently, men of pure faith and virtuous women should believe in the name of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance and make respectful offerings to the best of their ability.”

爾時，阿難問救脫菩薩曰：“善男子，應云何恭敬供養勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來？續命幡燈復云何造？”

Then Ananda asked Salvation Bodhisattva, “How should a virtuous man make an offering to the World Honored Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance? How should the longevity banners and lamps be prepared?”

救脫菩薩言：“大德，若有病人欲脫病苦，當為其人七日七夜受持八分齋戒，應以飲食及餘資具，隨力所辦供養苾蒭僧，晝夜六時禮拜供養勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來，讀誦此經四十九遍，燃四十九燈，造勝如來形像七軀，一一像前各置七燈，一一燈量大如車輪，乃至四十九日光明不絕，造五色彩幡長四十九搩手，應放雜類眾 生至四十九，可得過度危厄之難，不為諸橫惡鬼所持。

Salvation Bodhisattva said, “Most virtuous one, if there are sick people desiring to be free of their illness then the people caring from them should uphold the Eight Precepts for seven days, and provide food and drink and household items to offer to the Sangha as they are able. For the six four hour periods of the day they should worship and make offerings to the World Honored Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance. They should recite this sutra forty nine times, light forty nine lamps, prepare seven images of the Tathagata, They should place seven lamps in front of each image with each lamp having a zone of brightness about the size of a wheel. The lamps should burn uninterupted for forty nine days and nights. They should prepare multi-colored banners forty nine three finger length sections long. They should release forty nine kinds of living creatures. This will help the sick person overcome any danger and prevent them from being taken by any kind of demon.

“复次，阿難，若刹帝利灌頂王等，災難起時，所謂人眾疾疫難、他國侵逼難、自界叛逆難、星宿變怪難、日月薄蝕難、非時風雨難、過時不雨難。勝刹帝利灌頂王等，爾時應於一切有情起慈悲心，赦諸繫閉，依前所說供養之法供養勝世尊藥師琉璃光如來。由此善根及彼如來本愿力故，令其國界即得安隐，風雨順時，谷稼 成熟，一切有情无病歡樂，于其國中无有暴虐藥叉等神惱有情者，一切惡相皆即隐没，而刹帝利灌頂王等，壽命色力无病自在，皆得增益。阿難，若帝后、妃主、儲 君、王子、大臣、輔相、中宮釆女、百官黎庶，為病所苦及余厄難，亦應造立五色神幡，燃燈續明，放諸生命，散雜色华，燒眾名香，病得除愈，眾難解脫。”

“Moreover, Ananda, if the annointed Ksatriyah kings meet catastrophies, such as many people suffering from sickness, their countries invaded, rebellions in their inner cirlces, strange signs in the constellations, eclipse of the sun and moon, untimely wind and rain, and drought, then the annointed Ksatriyah kings should have compassion for all sentient beings, release all incarcerated people, and perform the offerings to the World Honored Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance described already. Because of these virtuous roots and the power of the Tathagata's vows the country's borders will be undisturbed, wind and rain will come at the proper time, the grain sowed will mature, all sentient beings will be free of illness and joyful, and the country will be free of brutal yaksas or other creatures that become angry at sentient beings. All bad omens will vanish gradually. The annointed Ksatriyah kings will each have long lives, greater energy, be free of illness, and be at ease. Ananda, if the empress, consorts, crown prince, other princes, chancellors, ministers, court ladies, officials of different ranks and positions, and the populace suffer from illness or any other disaster then they should prepare multi-colored banners, light lamps and keep them burning, release animals, scatter flowers, and burn good incense. Then they will heal and recover completely and be liberated from numerous calamities.”

爾時，阿難問救脫菩薩言：“善男子，云何已盡之命而可增益？”

At that time, Ananda asked Salvation Bodhisattva, “Virtuous man, how is it possible to extend life if one's lifespan has already been exhausted?”

救脫菩薩言：“大德，汝豈不聞如來說有九橫死耶？是故勸造續命幡燈修諸福德，以修福故，盡其壽命不經苦患。”

Salvation Bodhisattva said, “Most virtuous one, have you not heard the Tathagata say that there are nine ways to die by violence? So, you are advised to prepare longevity lamps and banners and to do good deeds to accumulate merit for future wealth. In this way you will not experience suffering and misfortune during your life.”

阿難問言：“九橫云何？”

Ananda asked, “What are the nine violent deaths?”

救脫菩薩言：“有諸有情得病雖輕，然無醫藥及看病者，設復遇醫授以非藥，實不應死而便橫死；又信世間邪魔外道、妖孽之師，妄說禍福便生恐動，心不自正卜問覓禍，殺種種眾生解奏神明，呼諸魍魎請乞福祐，欲冀延年終不能得。愚癡迷惑信邪倒見，遂令橫死入於地 獄無有出期，是名初橫。二者、橫被王法之所誅戮。三者、畋獵嬉戲，耽淫嗜酒，放逸无度，橫為非人奪其精氣。四者、橫為火焚。五者、橫為水溺。六者、橫為種種惡獸所啖。七者、橫墮山崖。八者、橫為 毒藥、厭禱、咒咀、起屍鬼等之所中害。九者、飢渴所睏，不得飲食而便橫死。是為如來略說橫死有此九種，其余復有無量諸橫難可具說。

Salvation Bodhisattva said, “Some people become ill and, although the illness is not initially serious, they do not have access to medicine and no doctor to treat them or there is medical assistance available but the wrong medicine is prescribed. They should not die but in fact they do die. Or, they believe in an evil cult or an evil teacher who talk falsely about disaters, disrupting their lives. Their mind will be ill at ease and they seek ways to predict disaters. They will sacrifice all kinds of animals to appease spirits, pray to monsters and demons for blessings, hoping to extend their life, which they are unable to do. Because of their ignorance and confusion they believe in an evil opposite of reality. So they are led to die and enter Hell with no fixed time to be released. This is called the first untimely death. The second form of untimely death is execution by the king's order. The third form of untimely death is recreational hunting and overindulgence in debauchery and alcohol, or other pleasure-seeking excesses and having their spirit taken by non-human beings. The forth form of untimely death is to be burnt to death. The fifth form of untimely death is drown. The sixth form of untimely death is to be devoured by one of many kinds of evil beasts. The seventh form of untimely death is to fall from a cliff. The eighth form of untimely death is to be poisoned, killed by witchcraft, an evil curse, or a corpse raised from the dead. The ninth form of untimely death is to die of hunger or thirst. These are the nine kinds of untimely death as explained briefly by the Tathagata. There are immeasurable more kinds but listing them all would be too difficult.

“复次，阿難，勝琰魔王主領世間名籍之記，若諸有情不孝、五逆、破辱三寶、壞君臣法、毀於信戒，琰魔法王隨罪輕重考而罰之。是故我今勸諸有情燃燈、造幡、放生修福，令度苦厄不遭眾難。”

“Moreover, Ananda, Lord Yama keeps a record of all the sentient beings in the world, whether they are not filial, commit any of the five heinous crimes, disgrace the Triple Gem, break the laws of a ruler and his ministers, or break their precepts. Lord Yama will consider the seriousness of the crime and punish accordingly. Therefore, I urge all sentient beings to light lamps, prepare banners, and to release living creatures to accumulate merit in order to avoid many kinds of suffering and misfortune.”

爾時，眾中有十二藥叉大将俱在會坐，所謂：

At that time there were twelve yaksa generals sitting in the audience. They were named:

宮毗羅大将， 伐摺羅大将， 迷企羅大将， 安底羅大将，

General Kumbhira, General Vajra, General Mihira, General Andira,

頞你羅大将， 珊底羅大将， 因達羅大将， 波夷羅大将，

General Anila, General Sandila, General Indra, General Pajra,

摩虎羅大将， 真達羅大将， 招杜羅大将， 毗羯羅大将。

General Makura, General Sindura, General Catura, General Vikarala.

此十二藥叉大将，一一各有七千藥叉以為眷屬，同時舉聲白佛言：“世尊，我等今者矇佛威力，得聞世尊藥師琉璃光如來名號，不復更有惡趣之怖。我等相率皆同一心，乃至盡形歸佛法僧，誓當荷負一切有情，為作義利饒益安樂。隨於何等村城國邑、空閑林中，若有流布此經，或復受持藥師琉璃光如來名號恭敬供養者，我等眷屬衛護是人，皆使解脫一切苦難，諸有願求悉令滿足。或有疾厄求度脫者，亦應讀誦此經，以五色縷結我名字，得如願已然後解結。”

The twelve yaksa generals each had a retinue of 7,000 yaksas. They said in unison to the Buddha, “World Honored One, today by the power of the Buddha we heard the name of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance and we not be frightened again of an evil rebirth. Each and every one of us is of the same heart. Every one of us takes refuge in the Triple Gem and vows to save all sentient beings, working for their benefit, peace, and happiness. Whether in villages, cities, capitals, or idle forests, if people transmit this sutra or call the name of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance in respect and make offerings, we will protect that person and liberate each one of them from suffering and have their wishes fulfilled. Or if there is someone suffering from illness and prays to be relieved from the suffering and taken them to nirvana then that person should also recite this sutra and tie our names with a five colored thread and then their wish will be fulfilled, after which they should untie the thread.”

爾時，世尊讚諸藥叉大将言：“善哉！善哉！大藥叉將，汝等念報世尊藥師琉璃光如來恩德者，常應如是利益安樂一切有情。”

Then the World Honored One praised the yaksa generals saying, “Excellent! excellent! Great yaksa generals, you repay the benevolence of the World Honored Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance. So all sentient beings will benefit with peace and happiness.

爾時，阿難白佛言：“世尊，當何名此法門？我等云何奉持？”

Then Ananda asked the Buddha, “World Honored One, what will this teaching be called? How should we practice it?”

佛告阿難：“此法門名《說藥師琉璃光如來本願功德》，亦名《說十二神將饒益有情結願神咒》，亦名《拔除一切業障》，應如是持。”

The Buddha told Ananda, “This teaching should be called the Sutra of the Merits of the Medicine Buddha of Pure Crystal Radiance or the Sutra of the Twelve Vows to Benefit All Sentient Beings or the Sutra to Eliminate Karmic Obstructions. It should be practiced as explained here.

時，薄伽梵說是語已，諸菩薩摩訶薩及大聲聞，國王、大臣、婆羅門、居士，天、龍、藥叉、揵達縛、阿素洛、揭路荼、緊捺洛、莫呼洛伽、人非人等，一切大眾聞佛所說，皆大歡喜，信受奉行。

When the Bhagavan had finished speaking all the bodhisattvas, mahasattvas, great sravakas, kings, ministers, Brahmins, lay people, devas, dragons, yaksas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoraga, and other humans and non-humans were all filled with great joy and followed the practices accordingly.


<h4>License</h4>
Medicine Buddha
Creative Commons License
Sutra of the Medicine Buddha Chinese and English Comparison is an original translation by NTI Buddhist Reader and is licensed under the <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/us/">Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License</a>.