附說曰：《孔子內備經》云：「震爻動，則知有佛。」《大涅盤》云：「如旃檀林，梅檀圍繞；如師子王，師子圍繞。」又云：「稽首佛足百千万迊。」今人以此月八日巡城，蓋其遺法矣。魏代踵前，於此尤盛。其七日晚，所司預奏早開城門，過半夜便內外俱起，遍滿四墎。《大涅槃》又云：「諸香木上懸五色幡，采微妙猶如天衣。種種名華(外書花字)以散樹（開）〔間〕。四方風神吹諸樹上時，非時華散雙樹間。」《法花經》云：「或以歡憶心，歌唄頌佛德。」又云：「（兩）〔雨〕栴檀沈香，繽紛而亂墜，如鳥飛空下，供養於諸佛。衆寶妙香鑪，燒無價之香。」《華嚴經》云：「（兩）〔雨〕天衆寶花，而芬芬如雪下。」是日尊儀輦輿並出。香火竟路，幡花引前；寺別僧尼，讚唄隨後。此時花樹未甚開敷，去聖久遠，力非感降其花道。俗唯刻鏤錦綵為之。漢王符為《潛夫論》已言花綵之費。晉范汪集《新野四居別傳》云：「家以剪佛華為（葉）〔業〕。」來蓋（又）〔久〕。《荊楚記》云：「謝靈運孫名茲藻者，為荊府諮議云，今世新花，並其祖靈運所制。」(似是花樹之色) 南北異俗，或不必同，圍繞乃是常事。八日獨行者，當以佛云：「劫後三月吾當涅盤，將欲滅度。」涅盤時到，戀慕特佛以二月八日生，轉法輪、降魔、涅盤。」皆同此日。《過去現在因果經》亦云：「佛以二月八曰生。」或復由此。

Supplementary Explanation: Confucius’ Classic of Internal Preparation says: “The movement of the trigram zhen signaled the birth of the Buddha.” The Nirvāṇa Sūtra says: “As a sandalwood forest is ringed by sandalwood, so the Lion King is encircled by lions.” It also says, “They touched their heads at the Buddha’s feet, and [encircled him] ten million times.” Today, on the 8th day of this month, people do a circuit of the city; this must be the legacy of this. The [Northern] Wei dynasty followed earlier traditions; [the custom] particularly flourished in this period. On the evening of the 7th day, the official responsible would petition for permission to open the city gates early, and after midnight people inside and outside the city would all arise, filling to capacity the outer walls. The Nirvāṇa Sūtra also says: “Multi-colored banners were hung from all kinds of fragrant woods, colorful and delicate as celestial clothing. Various types of celebrated flowers were scattered among the trees. When wind spirits of the four directions blewonto the trees, blossoms were scattered, out of season, among the double-trunked trees.” The Lotus Sūtra says: “Or with joy in their hearts, they praised in song the Buddha’s virtue.” It also says, “Sandalwood and aloe wood [aguru] in the rain, a riot of color falling in disarray; dropping from the void like flying birds, as offerings to all the Buddhas. The marvelous incense burner, [encrusted with] myriad jewels, burns priceless incense.” The Flower Adornment Sūtra says: “Myriad precious flowers in the rainy sky, falling like a flurry of snow.” On this day, His revered images are brought out in carriages. Clouds of incense filling the roads, banners and blossoms lead the way; monks and nuns, divided by temple, chanting eulogies bring up the rear. At this time of year, the flowering trees have still not fully distributed their blossoms; with the Sage so long departed, there is not the strength of resonance to draw down their flowery path. So the custom is to carve or embroider them. In the Han, Wang Fu’s Treatise of the Hidden One already wrote of the expense of embroidered flowers. Wang Fan of the Jin, in his “Collection of Alternate Biographies of the Four Residents of Xinye,” says: “The family cuts out Buddhist flowers for a living.” The practice has probably been around quite a long time. Record of Jing-Chu says: “Xie Lingyun’s grandson was named Zizao; he served as Advisor in the Jingzhou provincial government, etc. Today’s new flowers were all planted by his ancestor Lingyun.” (This seems to refer to flowering trees). The north and south have different customs, we need not assume them alike; but circumambulation is a constant. The fact that one only holds processions on the 8th day is probably related to the fact that the Buddha said, “In three months time I will attain nirvāṇa, and cross to extinction.” When the time of nirvāṇa came, they yearned for him deeply. The Sūtra on the Bodhisattva in the Womb says: “On the 8th day of the 2nd month, the Buddha was born, [delivered the lecture] “Setting in motion the wheel of the dharma,” subdued the demon, and attained nirvāṇa.” All occurred on this day. Scripture on Past and Present Causes and Effects also says that “The Buddha was born on the 8th day of the 2nd month.” It might also come from this.

Source: Ian D. Chapman, “Carnival Canons: Calendars, Genealogy, and the Search for Ritual Cohesion in Medieval China” (Princeton University, 2007), 297.
